

===== PAGE 1 =====
21
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
UNIT 2 STATE/TRAIT APPROACHES TO
PERSONALITY
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Objectives
2.2 Type Approaches to Personality
2.3 Trait Approaches/Theories
2.3.1 Allport’s Trait Approach
2.3.1.1 Common and Individual Traits
2.3.1.2 Cardinal Traits
2.3.1.3 Central Traits
2.3.1.4 Secondary Traits
2.3.2 Cattell’s Trait Approach
2.3.3 Eysenck’s Type/Trait Hierarchy
2.3.3.1 Extraversion/Introversion
2.3.3.2 Psychoticism/Impulse Control
2.3.3.3 Inhibition Theory
2.3.3.4 Arousal Theory
2.3.4 Guilford’s Trait Theory
2.3.4.1 Physiological and Morphological Traits
2.3.4.2 Needs, Interests, Attitudes
2.3.4.3 Aptitudes
2.3.4.4 Temperament
2.3.5 Five Factor Model
2.3.5.1 Extraversion (E)
2.3.5.2 Neuroticism (N)
2.3.5.3 Consientiousness (C)
2.3.5.4 Agreeableness (A)
2.3.5.5 Openness (O)
2.4 Let Us Sum Up
2.5 Unit End Questions
2.6 Suggested Readings
2.7 Answers to Self Assessment Questions
2.0 INTRODUCTION
A large umber of approaches to studying the personality have been put forward
by many theorists. One of these is the type and trait approaches and these have
been especially attributed to a few major theorists. In this unit we will take up
first of all the Type approaches to personality and herein we will discuss the triat
approach by Allport to describe personality. This will be followed by the trait
approach by Cattell who gave emphasis on source and surface traits. Following
this we will be dealing with Eysenck’s trait and type approach to personality.
Next will be the discussion of Guilford’s theory which again is a trait approach.
This is followed by the relatively more recent Five Facotr Model of personality.

===== PAGE 2 =====
22
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.1 OBJECTIVES
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
• Define personality;
• Describe Allport’s trait theory approach;
• Elucidate the factors contributtuing to Allport’s theory of personality;
• Describe Cattell’s trait theory to understanding personality;
• Explain the factors contributing to Cattell’s personality theory;
• Elucidate Eysenck’s theory of trait and type apprioach;
• Explain the factors contributing to Extraversion, neuroticism and
psychoticism;
• Elucidate the Trait approach of Guilford to personality;
• Analyse the factors contributing to Guilford’s idea of personality
development;
• Elucidate the Five Factor Model of personality; and
• Describe and analyse OCEAN.
2.2 TYPE APPROACHES TO PERSONALITY
The earliest effort to explain human behaviour involved the use of personality
typologies, which classified behaviour into discrete, all-or-nothing categories.
For example, Hippocrates a Greek Physician (and later on Galen, too) classified
individuals into four exclusive types according to four basic internal fluids or
humors, each associated with a particular temperament. These four basic fluids
were : blood, phelgm, black bile and yellow bile. The dominance of any one
fluid led to a particular personality temperament. For example, dominance of
blood produced Sanguine temperament (cheerful and active), dominance of
phelgm produced Phlegmatic temperament (apathetic and sluggish), the
dominance of black bile produced Melancholic temperament (sad and brooding)
and dominance of yellow bile produced Choleric temperament (irritable and
exitable). This is known as four-humor theory and remained popular for centuries
although today it is regarded as a baseless theory because it has been established
now that personality and moods are not driven by bodily fluids. Later on the
basis of observation of patients, Hippocrates pointed out that people with short
and thick bodies were prone to stroke and those with tall, thin bodies to
tuberculosis.
Another interesting typologies were that of William Sheldon, a U.S.A. Physician.
He tried to relate physique to temperament. On the basis of somatotype (body
build), he assigned each individual to one of the three categories , viz., (i)
ectomorphic (thin, long and fragile), (ii) endomorphic (fat, soft and round) and
(iii) mesomorphic (muscular, strong and rectangular). According to Sheldon,
ectomorphs are artistic, brainy and introverted, endomorphs are relaxed, fond of
eating, sleeping and sociable whereas mesomorphs are affective, dominant, filled
with energy and courage.

===== PAGE 3 =====
23
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Sheldon’s theory has not been substantiated and has proved of little value in
predicting individual behaviour (Tylor, 1965). In addition, people belonged to
many different shape and size and not all can be fitted to the Sheldon’s three
types.
MBTI (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator) typology is another typology which is
modern one and based upon Carl Jung’s theory of personality types. Using the
MBTI, individual’s selfreported preferences are used to assess four dimensions
of personality: E or I (Extraversion- Introversion), S or N (Sensing or Intution),
T or F (Thinking-Feeling) and J or P (Judgement-Perception). The MBTI identifies
16 types of personality based on Jung’s distinctions between E-I, S-N and T-F, as
well as upon Isobel Myer’s distinction between J-P . The J-P distinction indicates
as to whether an individual’s orientation toward the external world comes from
rational (judging) or the irrational (perceiving) function pair. If a person takes
MBTI, he would be assigned to only one pole of each dimension and the
combination of dimensions would determine which of the sixteen types best
describes him. For example, a person who receives ESFP (Extraverted-Sensing-
Feeling-Perception) classification would be characterised as outgoing, easygoing,
accepting, friendly and would be considered best in situations that need sound
common sense and practical ability with people as well as with things.
The Myers-Briggs is a very good type system because its categories are distinct
or discontinuous and people of any one type are supported to be very much like
each other that help them to be distinguished from other types. Critics of MBTI
state that while the four dimensions are informative, persons should be described
according to their actual scores on each dimension rather then being mixed into
types.
Type approach to personality apparently fails in its mission to provide a
satisfactory classification system because there are many people who cannot be
fitted into prescribed type. Today, psychologists prefer to describe people not in
terms of type rather in terms of traits. Types are not descriptive of the persons. In
fact, they rob the uniqueness of persons by placing the persons into a perconceived
category. Thus type exists in the eye of beholder whereas traits exist within the
people.
2.3 TRAIT APPROACHES/THEORIES
These approaches explain personality in terms of traits, which are defined as
relatively stable and consistent personal characteristics. Trait approach attempts
to explain personality and differences between people in terms of their personal
characteristics, to devise ways of measuring individual differences in personality
traits and to use these measures for understanding and predicting a person’s
behaviour. Type approach assume that there are separate, and discontinuous
categories into which persons fit whereas trait approach assumes that there are
continuous dimensions such as warmth, extraversion, etc. that vary in quality as
well as degree.
Under the trait approach, the viewpoints of Allport, Cattell, Eysenck Guilford,
and the Five Factor Model would be discussed in detail.

===== PAGE 4 =====
24
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.3.1 Allport’s Trait Approach
Allport is regarded as one of the most important and influential personality
theorists. Several years ago, Allport went through the English Dictionary and
painstakingly recorded a list of 17,953 words that described personal traits (Alport
& Odbert, 1936). Obviously it would be impractical to describe persons in terms
of where they fall on roughly 18,000 traits. However, on the basis of these words,
attempt was made to propose traits like dominance, friendlines, self-esteem, etc.
This is called lexical approach to define personality trait.
Fort Allport, traits are the building blocks of personality as well as the source of
individuality. He is known as idiographic trait theorist who has a strong belief
that each person has some unique as well as some common characteristics that
together form a unique combination of traits. For Allport, trait is something that
exits but remains invisible. It is located somewhere in the nervous system
(Ryckman, 1993).
We infer the existence of a trait by observing consistencies in the behaviour of
the person. Dissimilar stimuli tend to arouse a trait readiness within the person
and then trait manifests itself through the varieties of different responses. All
these responses are equivalent in the sense that they serve the function of
expression of trait.
To illustrate this, let us take an example of an employee working in the university
office. His shyness is inferred from his inability to establish friendship with
others, his avoidance of social gatherings of the employees, his enjoyment with
solitary entertainment activities and his unwillingness to participate in discussion,
etc.
2.3.1.1 Common and Individual Traits
Allport recognised two major categories of traits:
i) Common traits and
ii) Individual traits.
Common traits are those traits which we share in common with many others in
our culture. For example being quiet, showing due respect to seniors and making
polite behaviour to others are the traits we share with others in Indian culture.
This illustrates the common traits.
Individual traits or also called personal dispositions are those traits which are
unique to the person concerned and Allport regarded individual traits to be more
important than common traits.
According to him, there are three types of individual traits
2.3.1.2 Cardinal Traits
A cardinal trait is a trait which is so pervasive, dominant and outstanding in life
that every behaviour seems traceable to its influence. Most people do not have
cardinal traits but those who have them, are well-known by those traits. For
instance, Mahatma Gandhi was having the cardinal traits of peace-loving and
strong faith in non-violence for which he is well known.

===== PAGE 5 =====
25
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
2.3.1.3 Central Traits
Central traits are those traits which are generally listed in a carefully written
letter of recommendation. In fact, any trait name like friendliness, dominance,
self-centeredness would be the example of central trait. Every person has several
central traits and there are five to ten most outstanding traits in each person
around which a person’s life focuses.
2.3.1.4 Secondary Traits
Secondary traits are traits which are less conspicuous, less consistent, less
generalised and less relevant to the definition of personality. For example, food
habits, hair style, and specific attitudes are examples of secondary traits.
All these traits are dynamic in the sense that they possess motivational power.
Those individual traits or dispositions which are intensely experienced are said
to be more motivational. Those individual traits which are less intensively
experienced though possessing more motivational power are said to be more
stylistic.
Whether motivational or stylistics, some individual traits are close to the core of
the person’s personality whereas some are at the periphery.
According to Allport, all these individual traits form structure of personality
which, in turn, determines the behaviour of an individual. In his view only by
focussing upon the uniqueness of the individual, a scientific and substantial
understanding of personality is possible.
Allport also held that personality is not a mere bundle of unrelated traits, rather
it embodies a unity, consistency and integration of traits. This integration work
is accomplished by self or ‘Proprium’ as Allport has named it. In his view the
Proprium or self develops continuously from infancy to death and during this
period it moves through a series of stages.
Self Assessment Questions 1
1) Allport was supporter of:
a) Nomothetic approach to personality
b) Trait approach to personality
c) Idiograhic approach to personality
d) Both b and c
2) Your hair style will be the example of:
a) Cardinal trait b) Secondary trait
c) Central trait d) None of these
3) Allport emphasised more upon:
a) Common trait b) Individual traits
c) Proprium e) None of these.

===== PAGE 6 =====
26
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 4) Following Allport, the trait which is a defining characteristic of one’s
personality is :
a) Individual trait b) Common trait
c) Cardinal trait d) Secondary trait.
5) You have just been told by counsellor that on the basis of Myers-Briggs
personality test you are an ESTP . Your counsellor apparently favours
which of the following approaches to personality :
a) Trait approach b) Type appraoch
c) Psychodynamic approach d) Type approach
2.3.2 Cattell’s Trait Approach
Raymond Cattell (1950) considered personality to be a pattern of traits providing
the key to understanding it and predicting a person’s behaviour. According to
him, traits are relatively permanent and broad reaction tendencies of personality.
They serve as the building blocks of personality. He distinguished between (i)
surface trait and source trait, (ii) constitutional and environmental-mold traits
(iii) ability, temperament and dynamic traits.
i) Surface traits and source traits
The observable qualities of a personality like kindness, honesty, helpfulness,
generosity, etc. are named as surface traits. Allport has called these qualities or
traits as central traits. Using questionnaires and observations, Cattell studied
several thousand people and he reported certain cluster of surface traits that
appeared together from time to time. He further reported that these were the
clear evidence of some deeper, more general underlying personality factors, and
he referred to these as source traits.
Source traits make up the most basic structure of personality and are the underlying
factors that are responsible for the inter-correlation among surface traits. Although
source traits are smaller in number than surface traits, yet they are better predictors
of human behaviour. We all possess the same source traits but we do not possess
them in the same amount. For example, intelligence is an example of source trait
and everyone of us possesses this but we all do not possess intelligence in the
same amount.
Cattell found 23 source traits in normal persons and 16 of which he studied in
detail. These 16 basic source traits were then used in the construction of the
Sixteen Personality (16PF) Questionnaire popularly knows as “16 PF test”. The
sixteen factors identified by Cattell include (i) Reserved vs outgoing, (ii) less
intelligent vs more intelligent, (iii) emotional vs. stable (iv) humble vs. assertive,
(v) sober vs. happy-go-lucky, (vi) expedient vs. conscientious, (vii) shy vs.
ventursame, (viii) tough-minded vs. tender-minded, (ix) trusting vs. suspicious,
(x) practical vs. imaginative, (xi) forthright vs. shrewd (xii) placid vs.
apprehensive, (xiii) conservative vs. experimenting, (xiv) group-tied vs. self-
sufficiency, (xv) casual vs. controlled, and (xvi) relaxed vs. tense.
In addition to these 16 factors measured by personality test, Cattell, on the basis
of his subsequent researches proposed seven new factors : excitability, zeppia
vs. Coasthenia, boorishness vs. mature socialisation, sanguine casualness, group
dedication with sensed inadequacy and social panache vs. explicit expression.

===== PAGE 7 =====
27
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Although the sixteen source traits utilised in 16PF can be used to make distinction
between normals and neurotics, they fail to assess all aspects of deviant behaviour
as well as the characteristics of psychotics. Using factor analysis to the surface
traits of the normal and abnormal personality spheres, Cattell derived 12 new
factors that measure psychopathological traits, such as hypochondriasis,
zestfulness, brooding discontent, anxious depression, energy euphoria, guilt and
resentment, bored depression, paranoia, psychopathic deviation, schizophremia,
psychesthenia and general psychosis. All these traits are in bipolar format. These
12 factors have been combined with 16 PF in the construction of new test called
Clinical Analysis Questionnaire (CAQ). With the construction of CAQ, Cattell
was of the view that he has identified major source traits of both normal and
abnormal personality.
ii) Constitutional and environmental traits
Cattell also distinguished between constitutional traits and environmental mold
traits. Constitutional traits are those traits which are determined by nature or
biology whereas environmental mold traits are those which are determined by
nurture that is by experience gained in interaction with environment.
Most surface traits, for Cattell, reflects a mixture of both heredity (nature) and
environment (nurture).  However, he further points out that there are some source
traits which derive solely from within the individual (biology of the individual)
and there are some source traits which derive solely from source derived only
from environmental factors. Through a complicated statistical technique called
MA V A (Multiple Abstract V ariance Analysis), he was able to assess the degree
to which various traits are determined either by environmental or genetically
determined factors. MA V A is based upon the comparisons between people of the
same family either reared together or reared apart or between members of different
families reared either together or apart.
iii) Ability, temperament and dynamic traits
Cattell has further subdivided traits into ability traits, temperament traits and
dynamic traits.
Ability traits refer to the person’s skill in dealing with the environment and the
goals set therein. Intelligence is an example of ability trait.
Temperament traits refer to stylistic tendencies that largely show how a person
moves towards a goal. Being moody, irritable, easygoing are examples of
temperament trait.
Dynamic traits are the person’s motivation and interest which set the person in
action toward the goal. A person may be characterised as being power-seeking,
ambitious or sports-oriented. This relfects the dynamic trait. The important
dynamic traits in Cattell’s system are of three types, viz. (i) attitudes, (ii) ergs
and (iii) sentiments.
Attitudes are dynamic surface traits which display specific manifestations of
underlying motives. Ergs are constitutional dynamic source trait. It is through
ergs that cattell has given due recognition to innately determined but modifiable
impellents of behaviour. Ten ergs like hunger, sex, gregariousness, parental
protectiveness, curiosity, escape, pugnacity, acquisitiveness, self-assertion and

===== PAGE 8 =====
28
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
narcissistic sex have been recognised by Cattell. Sentiment focusses on social
object and it is an environmental mold dynamic source trait. Thus it is more or
less parallel to ergs except that it results from experimental or socio-cultural
factors.
Self Assessment Questions 2
1) The inter-correlation among surface traits leads to development of an
inference about:
a) Temperament trait b) Erg
c) Source trait d) None of there
2) Erg belongs to the category of:
a) Temperament trait b) Dynamic trait
c) Ability trait d) None.
3) Which of the following is not assessed by clinical Analysis
questionnaire?
a) Energy Euphoria b) Bored dpression
c) Schizophrenia d) Shyness.
4) Friendliness is an example of:
a) Source trait b) Surface trait
c) Temperament trait d) None.
5) According to Cattell which trait causes behaviour for predictable
purposes:
a) Surface trait b) Abiity trait
c) Source trait d) Dynamic trait.
2.3.3 Eysenck’s Type/ Trait Hierarchy
British Psychologist Hans Eysenck (1990) had a strong belief that personality is
largely determined by genes and that the environmental factors have very little
role to play in it. He opined that personality is more or less stable and enduring
organisation of a person’s character, temperament, intellect and physique. In this
definition, he has emphasised upon traits (stable and enduring characteristics)
which when clustered together, constitutes a type.
Eysenek’s viewpoint is personality is hierarchically organised, consisting of types,
traits and habits. At the lowest level of Eysenck’s hierarchy are the single responses
like action or thoughts. Regularly occurring responses form habits and related
habits form traits and several traits clustered together constitute a type or also
known as super factors.
Thus types are most abstract, followed by traits and then by habits and then
finally by responses at the beginning level. In fact, each of the ‘type’ concepts is
based on a set of observed inter correlations among various traits. Each ‘trait’ is
inferred from inter correlations among habitual responses. Habitual responses
are, in turn, based upon specific observable responses.

===== PAGE 9 =====
29
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Thus the entire process can be explained through an example.  It is known that
‘extraversion’ is based upon observed inter correlations among the traits like
liveliness, sociability, activity, and excitability. Each of these traits is inferred
from inter correlations among habitual responses such as for instance going to
club, liking to talk with people, taking part in any social activity on the spur of
the moment and so forth. These habits are themselves inferred from some
observable specific responses like real occasion where the person actually went
to club, talked with people, participated in group discussion, etc.
Based upon numerous factor analyses on personality data gathered from different
populations, Eysenck derived two major factors or dimensions of personality,
viz.,
i) Extraversion/Introversion
ii) Neuroticism/stability.
Later, on the basis of other statistical analysis, he postulated a third dimension,
viz.,
iii) Psychoticism/Impulse control.
These three dimensions, according to Eysenck, are the major individual difference
types considered most useful in describing personality functioning. To measure
these three dimensions of personality, Eysenck developed a paper and pencil
test. The latest version of the test has been named as Eysenck Personality
Questionnaire (EPQ).
2.3.3.1 Extraversion/Introversion
Extraverts are individuals who are sociable and impulsive and who like excitement
and oriented toward external reality. Introverts are introspective persons who are
more oriented toward inner reality and tend to exhibit preference towards a well-
ordered life. Neurotics are emotionally unstable persons. The hallmark of most
neurotics is that they exhibit an anxiety level disproportionate to the realities of
the situation. Some neurotics may exhibit obsessional or impulsive symptoms
and some may show unreasonable fear of objects, persons, places, etc. However,
there are neurotics who are free from the burden of anxiety and fear and in this
group, psychopaths are placed who fail to assess the consequences of their actions
and who behave in antisocial manner regardless of the punishment they get
(Eysenck, 1965).
2.3.3.2 Psychoticism/Impulse Control
Psychotics are characterised by traits such as being insensitive to others, hostile,
at times cruel and inhuman. Despite all the psychopathological traits, Eysenck
believed that psychotics tend to be creative (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). He
based his conclusion on his work with schizophrenics who gave many original
responses on the Rorschach test.
2.3.3.3 Inhibition Theory
Eysenck developed a theory called inhibition theory to explain why people who
differed along the various dimensions should behave differently from one another.
According to Eysenck, individual differences along the extraversion/introversion
dimension are strongly determined by heredity and have their basic origins in
the cerebral Cortex of the central nervous system.

===== PAGE 10 =====
30
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Drawing upon the work of Tephlov (1964) and Pavlov (1927), Eysenck pointed
out that extraverts have relatively stronger inhibitory processes and very weak
excitatory processes. Besides, their nervous systems are strong which forces them
to tolerate a large capacity of stimulation. Introverts, on the other hand, have
very strong excitatory processes and weak inhibitory processes. Apart from this,
their nervous system is weak which means that they have a small capacity to
tolerate stimulation. Thus the brains of extraverts react more slowly and weakly
towards stimuli thereby creating a strong desire for strong sensory stimulation
which causes them to seek excitement by going to parties, making new friends,
and attending to various types of meeting, etc. On the other hand, introverts are
more cortically aroused and their brains react quickly and strongly to stimuli. As
such, they tolerate relatively small amount of stimulation. Consequently, strong
stimulation from the environment proves to be aversive for them and they tend
to spend more time in aloof activities like reading, writing, playing chess, etc.
2.3.3.4 Arousal Theory
Recently, inhibition theory has been replaced by arousal theory by Eysenck
because inhibition and excitation although were very useful concepts, were found
to be extremely difficult to assess. Arousal theory has the advantage of identifying
the physiological systems underlying individual differences in extraversion /
introversion and neuroticism / stability. According to arousal theory, differences
in the behaviour of introverts and extraverts are due to the various parts of
Ascending Rreticular Activating System (ARAS) which is a network of fibers
going upward from the lower brain stem to the thalamus and cortex. Some other
fibers descend from the lower brain stem which influences the activities of bodily
muscles and autonomic nervous system. At the same time, such descending fibers
can also modulate the activity of the brain stem.
Thus the relation between ARAS and cortex become reciprocal, that is , ARAS
activate the cortex, which, in turn, influences ARAS either by increasing or
inhibiting the excitability. Eysenck was of view that introverts have innately
higher levels of arousal than extraverts. As a result, they are more likely to be
sensitive to stimulation. In arousal theory, Eysenck tends to make it explicit that
the seat of neuroticism lies in visceral brain or limbic system.
All structures of visceral brain such as hipocampus, amygdala, cingulum, septum
and hypothalamus are involved in generating emotionality. Since visceral brain
and ARSA are only partially independent from each other, cortical and autonomic
arousal can also be produced by activities of the visceral brain. In particular,
such activities produce arousal in sympathetic nervous system, causing increase
in heart rate, breathing rates and loss of digestion, etc. People showing higher
degree of neuroticism generally have lower thresholds for activity in visceral
brain and greater responsivity of sympathetic nervous system. That is the reason
why neurotics are innately more reactive rather overreacting to even mild forms
of stimulation.
Self Assessment Questions 3
1) What is the correct sequence of organisation in Eysenck type-trait
hierarchy?
a) Trait-Type-Habit-Response
b) Response-Habit-Trait-Type

===== PAGE 11 =====
31
State/Trait Approaches to
Personalityc) Type-Trait-Response-Habit
d) Habit-Response-Trait-Type.
2) Which of the followings is Not assessed by EPQ?
a) Extroversion b) Psychoticism
c) Neuroticism d) Pscyhopathic tendencies.
3) According to Eysenck, which are is Not the characteristic of Psychotics?
a) Psychotics are creative people
b) Psychotics are hostile and cruel
c) Psychotics are inhumane
d) Psychotics are oriented toward inner reality.
4) Who claimed that personality can best be understood by assessing people
on two dimensions: Extroversion and Neuroticism ?
a) Allport b) Cattell
c) Eyesenck d) Jung.
5) According to arousal theory of Eysenck, which one is regarded as the
seat of neuroticism ?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2.3.4 Guilford’s Trait Theory
J.P . Guilford is another important psychologist who have tried to analyse and
predict about personality on the basis of traits. The importance of trait for
Guildford’s view about personality can be understood from his definition of
personality which states that an individual personality is nothing but the
individual’s unique pattern of traits. Trait, for him, is any distinguishable, relatively
enduring way in which one person differs from another.
Using factor analysis, Guilford came to the conclusion that there are seven
modalities of traits, that is (i) morphological, (ii) physiological, (iii) needs, (iv)
interest, (v) attitudes (vi) aptitudes and (vii) temperament. The first two are the
somatic traits whereas the last five are behavioural aspects of personality.
Guilford has emphasised that these modalities should not be regarded as seven
separate constituent parts of personality but personality must be seen as integrated
whole and these seven modalities can be seven different directions from which
the whole can be viewed. In other words, personality is not the sum total of
seven traits but rather a whole or single entity which can be looked at from at
least seven different angles. These seven traits are briefly discussed below.

===== PAGE 12 =====
32
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.3.4.1 Physiological and Morphological Traits
Physiological traits and morphological traits together are called somatic traits.
Physiological traits refer to physical functions such as heart rate, breathing rate,
hormone level, blood sugar and so forth. Morphological traits, on the other hand,
refer to physical attributes such as physique, head size, length of hand and leg,
size of ear, curvature of spine, etc. Guilford (1959) reported very little substantial
relationship between these two types of traits, that is, morphological traits and
physiological traits although Sheldon (1942) earlier had reported a high correlation
between physique and temperament.
2.3.4.2 Needs, Interests and Attitudes
Needs, interests and attitudes are regarded as hormetic (adaptive responses)
dimensions of personality by Guilford. These hormetic traits, therefore, instigate
action because they are more or less directly related to motivation.
Needs are said to be relatively permanent dispositions that motivate the person
towards certain condition. For example, prestige is one need and it instigates
action towards getting social prestige. Likewise to get food is a need, which
motivates a hungry person toward securing a full stomach.
Interests are person’s generalised behaviour tendency to be attracted by some
stimuli. Thus, for Guilford, interest are general rather than specific traits and
valued positively rather than negatively. Besides, interest also refers to liking to
perform some activities. All such interests contribute to causation of behaviour.
Attitudes also instigate behaviour and they are defined as a disposition to favour
or not to favour a social object or social action. Since attitudes involve belief,
feelings and action, therefore, they are cognitive, affective and conative, too.
One’s view about premarital sex, divorce and equal right to women can be the
example of attitudes. Having a particular attitude forces the person to think, feel
and act accordingly.
2.3.4.3 Aptitudes
Aptitudes refer to how well an individual can perform a given activity and they
represent a dimension of ability though they are more specific than abilities. It
means that all aptitudes are abilities but not all abilities are aptitude. For example,
a tall person may have the ability to reach at the highest shelf but this could not
be considered his aptitude. On the basis of factor analysis, Guildford (1959)
identified three primary aptitudes, viz., (i) Perceptual aptitudes, (ii) Psychomotor
aptitudes and (iii) intelligence.
Perceptual aptitudes relate to the various sense modalities and include factors
like visual, auditory and kinesthetic sensitivity.
Psychomotor aptitudes are abilities shown by physical educators, dance instructors
and athletic coaches. Human engineers also need psychomotor aptitudes because
they have to design machine in such a way that they must be operated conveniently.
Intelligence is a general aptitude. Guilford developed his famous Structure-of-
intellect model based upon three primary parameters of operations, products and
contents. Originally, there were five categories of operation and six categories of

===== PAGE 13 =====
33
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
product and four categories of content in this model. The result was 5 × 6 × 4
=120 factors or components of intelligence. Shortly before his death, Guilford
(1988), however, expanded the total number from 120 to 180 abilities or factors
when he raised the categories of operation from five to six by dividing one of the
component of operation, that is, memory into two : Memory recording and
Memory relation. The total number of categories of contents was also changed
from four to five. Thus now the total factors constituting intelligence became
6 × 6 × 5 = 180.
2.3.4.4 Temperament
According to Guilford (1959) temperament refers to the manner in which the
individual performs a behaviour. Whether a person is impulsive, tolerant,
deliberate or critical in his or her behaviour, is all indicative of the person’s
temperament. Temperament has been assessed by varieties of inventories in which
Guilford-Zimmerman Temperament Survey (GZTS) became very popular.
GZTS assesses 10 bipolar traits of temperament : General activity vs. Inactivity
(G), Restraint vs. Impulsiveness (R), Ascendance vs. submissiveness (A),
Sociability vs. Shyness (S), Emotional stability vs. Depression (E) Objectivity
vs. Subjectivity (O), Friendliness vs. Hostility (F), Thoughtfulness vs.
Unreflectiveness (T), Personal relations vs. Criticalness (P) and Masculinity vs.
Feminity (M).
Guilford has pointed out that there are three levels of trait generality : hexic
level, primary trait level and type level. Hextic trait is displayed by the person
only in specific situations. For example, Mohan who is generally shy and reserved
person, may show dominance and aggression before his friends for wining the
competition. Here dominance and aggression are examples of hexic level trait
and determine his specific actions.
Primary traits are manifested in broader range of behaviour than are hexic traits.
For example, when Shyam shows dominance and aggression most of the time in
his behaviour, it means these two are his primary traits. Guilford further has
opined that primary traits are determined to some extent by types. When a person’s
behaviours generally revolve around any single disposition, he is said to be
manifesting a type upon which Guilford did not give as much emphasis as it had
been done by Eysenck. Thus types are composed of primary traits which have
positive intercorrelations. An extravert type, for example, may be recognised
through observation of high correlations among the primary traits of sociability,
orientation towards external reality, impulsiveness, love for contacting other
people, tolerance for pain, etc.
Self Assessment Questions 4
1) Which of the followings is Not a hormetic trait ?
a) Interest b) Need
c) Attitude d) Aptitude
2) Physicque is an example of:
a) Hormetic trait b) Physiological trait
c) Morphological d) None.

===== PAGE 14 =====
34
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 3) How many abilities have been identified by Structrue-of-intellect model?
a) 120 b) 160
c) 180 d) 140
4) Physical functions like heart rate, breathing rate, brain wave patterns
are all covered by :
a) Morphological traits b) Physicologial traits
c) Hormetic traits d) Behavioural traits.
5) Which of the followings is not assessed by GZTS?
a) Masculinity – feminity b) Friendliness – hostility
c) Practical – imaginative d) Sociability – shyness.
2.3.5 Five Factor Model
Today, the most talked about trait approach to personality is the Five Factor
Model (FFM) also known as the Big Five. As its name implies, according to this
model there are five broad personality factors, each of which is composed of
constellation of traits. Based on his own researches as well as researches of others
in 1981, Goldberg pointed out that it is possible to prepare a model for structuring
individual differences among traits of personality. Big Five was meant to refer to
the finding that each factor subsumes a large number of specific traits. In fact,
the Big Five are almost as broad and abstract as Eysenck’s superfactors. Those
Big Five dimensions of personality using the names assigned by MC Crae and
Costa (1987) are as under :
2.3.5.1 Extraversion (E)
This factor assesses the quality and intensity of interpersonal interaction. High
scorer in this factor is characterised by being sociable, active, talkative, person-
oriented, optimistic, fun-loving and affectionate, whereas low scorer is
characterised by being reserved, sober, aloof, task oriented, retiring and quiet.
Thus this factor contrasts extraverted traits with introverted traits.
2.3.5.2 Neuroticism (N)
This factor assesses adjustment vs. emotional instability. Persons high on
neuroticism are prone to emotional instability. Such persons tend to experience
negative emotion and are characterised by being moody, irritable, nervous,
insecure, and hypochondriacal. Low scorers on this dimension are characterised
by being calm, relaxed, unemotional, hardy, self-satisfied etc. Thus this factor
differentiates people who are emotionally stable from those who are emotionally
unstable.
2.3.5.3 Consientiousness (C)
This factor mainly assesses the person’s degree of organisation, persistence and
motivation in goal directed behaviour. In other words, this factor describes task
and goal directed behaviours and the socially required impulse control behaviour.
This factor easily differentiates individuals who are dependable, organised, hard
working, responsible, reliable and thorough (high scorers) from those who are
undependable, disorganised, unreliable, impulsive, irresponsible, lazy and
negligent (low scorers).

===== PAGE 15 =====
35
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
2.3.5.4 Agreeableness (A)
This factor assesses the person’s quality of interpersonal orientation ranging from
compassion to antogonism in thinking, feeling and action. High scorer on this
factor would be characterised by soft-hearted, good-natured, trusting, helpful,
straightforward and forgiving whereas the low scorer would be characterised by
cynical, suspicious, uncooperative, vengeful, irritable and manipulative.
2.3.5.5 Openness (O)
This factor assesses proactive seeking and appreciation of experience for its own
sake as well as tolerance for and exploration for the something new and unfamiliar.
High scorers would be characterised by being good-natured, warm, sympathetic
and cooperative whereas low scorers would be characterised by being unfriendly,
aggressive, unpleasant, argumentative, cold and even hostile.
First letters of the Big Five dimensions can be reordered to spell out the word
OCEAN—an easy way to keep them in memory.
For assessing these Big Five dimensions, Goldberg (1992) has developed a
questionnaire named Transparent Bipolar Inventory. Still another much more
popular questionnaire to assess Big Five has been developed by Costa and McCrae
(1992). This questionnaire has been named as the NEO-Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R). Originally, this inventory assessed only N, E and O but later on the
other two factors such as A and C were also included. In this new inventory each
dimension or factor is defined by six facets and each facet is measured by 8
items. Therefore, the latest version of NEO-PI-R consists of a total of 240 items
(5 factos × 6 facets × 8 items). On the basis of several studies, McCrae and Costa
(1990) are convinced that these five factors as measured by NEO-PI-R are
sufficient for describing the basic dimensions of personality. In fact, they go
beyond this to say that, “no other system is as complete and yet so parsimonious”.
In making a fair evaluation to trait approach, it can be said that longitudinal
studies support trait approach. McCrae and Costa (1990) have studied personality
traits of persons over time and have found them to be stable for a periods of 3 to
30 years. They have opined that stable individual differences in basic dimensions
are universal feature of adult personality. Despite this, critics are of view that
trait approach, like type approach, don’t explain the causes or development of
personality. It simply identify and describe characteristics, which are correlated
with behaviour. Moreover, critics of trait perspective further say that the
consistency of our behaviour across situations is very low and therefore, not
predictable on the basis of personality traits. Initially, one of the severest critics
of trait approach was Walter Mischel (1968) who claimed that the situation, and
not our traits, determines the behaviour.
Thus his stand initiated person situation debate, that is, question of relative
importance of person and situation in determining the behaviour of the persons.
Now Mischel has modified his original position and has proclaimed that behaviour
is shaped by both the person (traits) and the situation. Other psychologists have
also provided support for the view that there are some internal traits which strongly
influence behaviour across different situations (Carson, 1989; McAdams, 1992).

===== PAGE 16 =====
36
Personality: Theories and
Assessment Self Assessment Questions 5
1) Which of the followings is not assessed by Five factor model ?
a) Neuroticism b) Psychoticism
c) Agreeableness d) Conscientiousness.
2) The latest version of NEO-PI-R measures the dimensions of personality
through :
a) Six facets b) Five facets
c) Seven facets d) Four facets.
3) Who developed Transparent Bipolar Inventory ?
a) McCrae and Costa b) Goldbeng
c) Eysenck d) None of these.
4) Who has been considered as the most severest critics of trait appraoch?
a) Campbell b) Hawley
c) Mischel d) None of these.
5) High scorers on Agreableness dimension of Big Five model would be
characterised by being :
a) good-natured, trusting and soft-hearted
b) organised, reliable and hard-working
c) curious, creative and untraditional
d) active, talkative and fun-loving
2.4 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we learnt that the earliest effort to explain human behaviour involved
the use of personality typologies, which classified behaviour into discrete, all-
or-nothing categories. The first was the four-humor theory and remained popular
for centuries although today it is regarded as a baseless theory because it has
been established now that personality and moods are not driven by bodily fluids.
This was followed by Sheldon’s somatotype (body build) based theory of
personality. Sheldon assigned each individual to one of the three categories ,
viz., (i) ectomorphic (thin, long and fragile), (ii) endomorphic (fat, soft and round)
and (iii) mesomorphic (muscular, strong and rectangular). According to Sheldon,
ectomorphs are artistic, brainy and introverted, endomorphs are relaxed, fond of
eating, sleeping and sociable whereas mesomorphs are affective, dominant, filled
with energy and courage.
MBTI (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator) typology is another typology which is
modern one and based upon Carl Jung’s theory of personality types. The four
dimensions of personality that are assessed here are : E or I (Extraversion-
Introversion), S or N (Sensing or Intution), T or F (Thinking-Feeling) and J or P
(Judgment-Perception). The MBTI identifies 16 types of personality based on
Jung’s distinctions between E-I, S-N and T-F, as well as upon Isobel Myer’s
distinction between J-P .

===== PAGE 17 =====
37
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Since the type theories robbed the uniqueness of persons by placing the persons
into a perconceived category, the trait theories came about. Trait approaches
explain personality in terms of traits, which are defined as relatively stable and
consistent personal characteristics. Trait approach attempts to explain personality
and differences between people in terms of their personal characteristics, to devise
ways of measuring individual differences in personality traits and to use these
measures for understanding and predicting a person’s behaviour.  Under the trait
approach, we considered the viewpoints of Allport, Cattell, Eysenck, Guilford,
and the Five Factor Model would be discussed in detail.
For Allport, traits are the building blocks of personality as well as the source of
individuality. For Allport, trait is something that exits but remains invisible. It is
located somewhere in the nervous system (Ryckman, 1993).  Allport recognised
two major categories of traits  Common traits and Individual traits.  He classified
individual traits further into three types, viz. cardinal tratis,  central trait and
secondary trait.
All these traits are dynamic in the sense that they possess motivational power.
Those individual traits or dispositions which are intensely experienced are said
to be more motivational. Those individual traits which are less intensively
experienced though possessing more motivational power are said to be more
stylistic.
According to Allport, all these individual traits form structure of personality
which, in turn, determines the behaviour of an individual. In his view only by
focussing upon the uniqueness of the individual, a scientific and substantial
understanding of personality is possible.
We then learnt about Cattel’s Trait theory. Raymond Cattell (1950) considered
personality to be a pattern of traits providing the key to understanding it and
predicting a person’s behaviour. According to him, traits are relatively permanent
and broad reaction tendencies of personality. They serve as the building blocks
of personality. He distinguished between (i) surface trait and source trait, (ii)
constitutional and environmental-mold traits (iii) ability, temperament and
dynamic traits.
Cattell found 23 source traits in normal persons and 16 of which he studied in
detail. These 16 basic source traits were then used in the construction of the
Sixteen Personality (16PF) Questionnaire popularly knows as “16 PF test”. In
addition to these 16 factors measured by personality test, Cattell, on the basis of
his subsequent researches proposed seven new factors. Using factor analysis to
the surface traits of the normal and abnormal personality spheres, Cattell derived
12 new factors that measure psychopathological traits. Cattell also distinguished
between constitutional traits and environmental mold traits. Cattell has further
subdivided traits into ability traits, temperament traits and dynamic traits.
Dynamic traits are the person’s motivation and interest which set the person in
action toward the goal. The important dynamic traits in Cattell’s system are of
three types, viz. (i) attitudes, (ii) ergs and (iii) sentiments.
We then learnt about Eysenck’s Type Trait Hierarchy theory. British Psychologist
Hans Eysenck (1990) had a strong belief that personality is largely determined
by genes and that the environmental factors have very little role to play in it. He

===== PAGE 18 =====
38
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
opined that personality is more or less stable and enduring organisation of a
person’s character, temperament, intellect and physique. In this definition, he
has emphasised upon traits (stable and enduring characteristics) which when
clustered together, constitutes a type.
Eysenek’s viewpoint is personality is hierarchically organised, consisting of types,
traits and habits. At the lowest level of Eysenck’s hierarchy are the single responses
like action or thoughts. Regularly occurring responses form habits and related
habits form traits and several traits clustered together constitute a type or also
known as super factors.  Later, on the basis of other statistical analysis, he
postulated a third dimension, viz., Psychoticism/Impulse control. These three
dimensions, according to Eysenck, are the major individual difference types
considered most useful in describing personality functioning. To measure these
three dimensions of personality, Eysenck developed a paper and pencil test. The
latest version of the test has been named as Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
(EPQ).
Recently, inhibition theory has been replaced by arousal theory by Eysenck
because inhibition and excitation although were very useful concepts, were found
to be extremely difficult to assess. According to arousal theory, differences in
the behaviour of introverts and extraverts are due to the various parts of Ascending
Rreticular Activating System (ARAS) in the nervous system.
Eysenck’s theory was followed by learning about Guilford’s trait theory. Guilford
defined personality as the individual’s unique pattern of traits. Trait, for him, is
any distinguishable, relatively enduring way in which one person differs from
another. Using factor analysis, Guilford came to the conclusion that there are
seven modalities of traits, that is (i) morphological, (ii) physiological, (iii) needs,
(iv) interest, (v) attitudes (vi) aptitudes and (vii) temperament. The first two are
the somatic traits whereas the last five are behavioural aspects of personality.
Guilford emphasised that these modalities should not be regarded as seven
separate constituent parts of personality but personality must be seen as integrated
whole and these seven modalities can be seven different directions from which
the whole can be viewed. Guilford also pointed out three levels of trait generality:
hexic level, primary trait level and type level.
Today, the most talked about trait approach to personality is the Five Factor
Model (FFM) also known as the Big Five. As its name implies, according to this
model there are five broad personality factors, each of which is composed of
constellation of traits. Based on his own researches as well as researches of others
Goldberg pointed out that it is possible to prepare a model for structuring
individual differences among traits of personality. Big Five was meant to refer to
the finding that each factor subsumes a large number of specific traits. In fact,
the Big Five are almost as broad and abstract as Eysenck’s superfactors. Those
Big Five dimensions of personality using the names assigned by MC Crae and
Costa (1987) are Extraversion (E), Neuroticism (N), Consientiousness  (C),
Agreeableness (A), Openness (O)
First letters of the Big Five dimensions can be reordered to spell out the word
OCEAN—an easy way to keep them in memory.
For assessing these Big Five dimensions, Goldberg (1992) has developed a
questionnaire named Transparent Bipolar Inventory. Still another much more

===== PAGE 19 =====
39
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
popular questionnaire to assess Big Five has been developed by Costa and McCrae
(1992) named as the NEO-Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R). Originally, this
inventory assessed only N, E and O but later on the other two factors such as A
and C were also included.
2.5 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Make distinction between individual traits and common traits. Following
Allport, discuss the different types of individual traits and their importance
in predicting human behaviour.
2) Explain viewpoints of Cattell regarding traits as being one of the determiners
of human behaviour.
3) Do you find Eysenck’s type-trait hierarchy a satisfactory explanation for
making prediction about human behaviour ?
4) Discuss the different trait modalities as outlined by J.P. Guilford for
understanding and predicting human behaviour.
5) Discuss the role of five-factor model in understanding human behaviour.
6) Do you find trait perspective a satisfcatory explanation for explaining
personality. Give reasons.
2.6 SUGGESTED READINGS
Zimbardo, P .G . & Weber, A.L. (1994). Psychology: Harper Collins
Baron, R.A. (2005). Pscyhology: Pearson Education
Santrock, J.W. (2006). Psychology: Essentials: Tata McGraw-Hill
Wade, G . & Tavris, C. Psychology: Pearson Education.
2.7 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT
QUESTIONS
1) 1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (b) 4. (c) 5. (b)
2) 1. (c) 2. (b) 3. (d) 4. (a) 5. (c)
3) 1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (d) 4. (c) 5. (c)
4) 1. (a) 2. (c) 3. (c) 4. (b) 5. (c)
5) 1. (b) 2. (a) 3. (b) 4. (c) 5. (a)