

===== PAGE 1 =====
5
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND CONCEPT OF
PERSONALITY AND PERSONALITY
DEVELOPMENT
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Objectives
1.2 Definition and Concept of Personality
1.3 Personality Development
1.3.1 Biological Factors
1.3.2 Psychological Factors
1.3.2.1 Intellectual Determinants
1.3.2.2 Emotional Determinants
1.3.2.3 Excessive Love and Affection
1.3.2.4 Self-disclosure
1.3.2.5 Aspiration and Achievements
1.3.2.6 Achievements
1.3.2.7 Goal Setting
1.3.3 Environmental Factors
1.3.3.1 Social Acceptance
1.3.3.2 Social Deprivation
1.3.3.3 Educational Factors
1.3.3.4 Family Determinants
1.3.3.5 Emotional Climate of Home and Ordinal Position
1.3.3.6 Size of the Family
1.4 Let Us Sum Up
1.5 Unit End Questions
1.6 Suggested Readings
1.7 Answers to Self Assessment Questions
1.0 INTRODUCTION
For laypersons, the term personality is often understood in terms of being good
looking, attractive etc. They go by the impression created by the person concerned.
The ability to talk and interact with others pleasantly in addition to being good
looking, would make others say that the person concerned has a good personality.
Persons who do not have good looks or not well dressed or do not interact
adequately are considered to have poor personality. But scientifically this is not
a true concept of personality. In fact, psychologists consider any attempt to define
personality in terms of social attractiveness inadequate because of two reasons,
first it limits the number and types of behaviour considered important and worthy
for incorporation into the study of personality. Second, such notion carries the
absurd implication that some people who have unique abilities and temperament
traits are devoid of having a personality. In this unit we will be dealing with the
definition of personality as put forward by psychologists. Definition of personality
will be presented as given by Gordon Allport and there will be a discussion of
the concept of personality development. Under Personality development, various
factors contributing to the same will be discussed including the biological,
psychological and environmental factors.


===== PAGE 2 =====
6
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 1.1 OBJECTIVES
After the reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Define personality and describe the nature of personality;
• Elucidate the concept of personality;
• List the characteristic features of personality;
• Explain the factors that contribute to the development of personality; and
• Identify the environmental factors that influence personality development.
1.2 DEFINITION AND CONCEPT OF PERSONALITY
The term personality is often understood in terms of social attractiveness. A
good personality is considered to be one who impresses other people and who
has the ability to get on well with others. Those who do not possess such ability
are said to have relatively poor personality. However if one considers personality
from a scientific point of view, being attractive to others is not a true concept of
personality. In fact, psychologists consider any attempt to define personality in
terms of social attractiveness as inadequate because of two reasons, (i) it limits
the number and types of behaviours considered important and worthy for
incorporation into the study of personality and (ii) such a notion implies that
some people who have unique abilities, temperament and traits are devoid of
having a personality.
Psychologists have attempted to explain the concept of personality in terms of
individuality and consistency.  We often observe that people differ a great deal in
the ways they think, feel and act and that too to different or even same situations.
This distinctive pattern of behaviour helps one to define one’s identity.
Commenting upon the notion of individuality, it has been said that each of us in
certain respects is like all other persons, like some other persons and like no
other person who has been in the past or will be existing in future (Kluckhohn &
Murray, 1953).
Another important notion in defining the concept of personality is consistency.
In other words it can be stated that the concept of personality also rests on the
observation that a person seems to behave somewhat consistently in different
situations over different time. Form this observation of perceived consistency
comes the notion of personality traits that determine the way of responding to
one’s world.
Combining these notions of individuality and consistency, personality can be
defined as the distinctive and unique ways in which each individual thinks, feels
and acts, which characterise a person’s response throughout life. In other words,
it can be said that personality refers to all those relatively permanent traits,
dispositions or characteristics within the person that give some measure of
consistency to the person’s behaviour. These traits may be unique, common to
some groups or shared by the entire species but their pattern will be different
from individual to individual.
The thoughts, feelings and actions that are perceived as reflecting an individual’s
personality typically have three characteristics


===== PAGE 3 =====
7
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
i) Thoughts, feelings and actions are considered as behavioural components
of identity that make distinction between individuals
ii) Behaviours are viewed as being primarily caused by internal rather than
environmental factors.
iii) The behaviours of the person seem to have organisation and structure.
Behaviours of an individual seem to fit together in a meaningful way. It is to be
kept in mind that the nature of behaviours is dynamic and there may occur changes
in the organisation and structure of behaviours over a period of time.  It is in this
sense that Allport (1937, 1961), defined personality as the dynamic organisation
within the person of the psychophysical systems that determine the unique
adjustments to one’s environment. This suggests that there is an inner personality
that guides and directs individual’s behaviour. Allport the man who has done
more than anyone to shed light on the myriad meaning of the term personality
analysed 50 definitions of personality, and finally put forward his own definition
of personality mentioned above.
For better distinct understanding of the term personality, it is essential that it
should not be confused with character and temperament. While the term character
refers to the value judgements, which are made about a person’s moral values or
ethical behaviour,  the term temperament refers to the inborn enduring
characteristics such as adaptability, irritability etc. However, both character and
temperament are vital parts of personality.
Self Assessment Questions 1
1) Who has said that personality is the dynamic organisation of traits?
a) Eysenck b) Allport
c) Murray d) None of them.
2) Which of the followings are regarded as component of behavioural
identity of personality?
a) Thoughts b) Feelings
c) Actions d) All.
3) Human behaviours are largely determined by:
a) Internal factors b) Environmental factors
c) Both d) Neither.
4) Which one is the inborn enduring characteristics of the personality?
a) Traits b) Character
c) Temperament d) None of these.
5) Personality has been understood as largely the combination of:
a) Trait and temperament b) Consistency and individuality
c) Value and attitude d) Character and temperament.


===== PAGE 4 =====
8
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 1.3 PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
The development of personality has been a topic of interest for the personality
psychologists right from the time the term came into existence. Psychologists
have tried to identity those factors which directly or indirectly influence the growth
and development of personality. Although there are a large number of factors,
which influence the development of personality, such factors have been broadly
grouped into three general categories and these are given below.
1) Biological factors,
2) Pscyhological factors,
3) Environmental factors.
Since these factors tend to determine the way personality develops they are also
called as determinants of personality. These three sets of factors are discussed
here in detail.
1.3.1 Biological Factors
Biological determinants also called as physical determinants emphasise that
physique and body functioning are directly responsible for personality
development. Some of these factors are: (i) Body build (ii) Physical attractiveness
(iii) Homeostasis (iv) Physical defects (v) Health conditions.
i) Body build: Body build influences personality directly by determining what
an individual can and cannot do, as well as what the individual’s reaction
will be to all those whose body builds are superior or inferior.
Some of the known body builds are (i) ectomorph (ii) endomorph, and
(iii) mesomorph.
Ectomorphs are persons who are tall and thin in their body builds. They
have been generally found to be superior to Endomorphs who have round
and soft body builds. The superiority is especially in speed and endurance.
Likewise, mesomorphs who are strong and muscular in their body builds
have been found to be superior to both ectomorphs and endomorphs in
activities like speed, endurance and agility.
It has also been reported that body build of an individual affects the person’s
self-concept, which is an important constituents of personality. This self
concept can be favourable or unfavourable. For instance if the body build
allows the person to do things that are socially desirable, prestigious and
better than others it would contribute to positive self concept about oneself.
On the other hand if it allows the person to do things which are not favourable
or positive or ends up in failure, it would lead to poor or negative self concept.
ii) Physical attractiveness:  Physical attractiveness is another physical
component that affects the development of personality. An attractive person
of any age is more appealing than a person who is unattractive. Brislin &
Lewis (1968) have commented that it is very much rewarding to be with
someone who is physically attractive. Generally, it has been found that the
people tend to be more tolerant in their attitudes and judgements of an
attractive person. That is the reason why a pretty child is less likely to be
punished or criticised for troublesome behaviour than a simple looking


===== PAGE 5 =====
9
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
homely child. In business circle, an attractive worker may be less efficient
and less conscientious than an unattractive worker and yet, the attractive
worker is relatively more likely to get promotion sooner than the unattractive
one.
iii) Homeostasis: Homeostasis is another important determinant. It refers to
the maintenance of a stable internal environment through relatively having
normal temperature, normal level of blood sugar, normal level of blood
pressure, proper water balance, etc. When any of these conditions is upset,
disequilibrium starts and disturbances in homeostatis results. Homeostatis
or disturbances in it, has a significant impact upon personality both directly
or indirectly.
Directly, the effect of homeostatis is seen in relaxed, controlled and socially
acceptable behaviour patterns of the person who is feeling well both
physically and psychologically. When the level of homeostasis is disturbed,
behaviours like irritability, indigestion, insomnia and other uncomfortable
states often result.
Disturbances in homestasis
Disturbances in homestasis also affects personality indirectly. It affects
personality through the way the person reacts to what he thinks and believes
to be the attitudes of some significant people in his life. For example, a
person who is above average in physical stature in comparison to his age
and sex group, because of excessive hormonal discharge will respond to his
superior size in one of the two ways. If his superior size is viewed favourably
by others, his reaction will be positive and therefore, disturbance in
homeostasis will thus have a favourable impact upon the development of
personality. But if his size proves to be a social handicap and others ridicule
it, his reactions will be negative and the effect in the disturbance of
homeostasis will be unfavourable.
Some studies have very clearly shown that development of personality is
affected by homeostasis or lack of it. For example, when the blood sugar
goes above the normal range, depressive mental states tend to follow. Severe
deficiency in vitamin B complex results in increased level of emotionality
and depression. High blood pressure frequently produces neuroticism.
Anoxia or reduction in the amount of oxygen in the inspired air, as it happens
in asthma, causes emotional outbursts, mental confusion and self-criticism.
iv) Physical defects: Physical defects are another determiners. The first scientific
study showing the impact of physical defect upon personality has come
from Alfred Adler’s theory of organ inferiority. Today several studies have
been conducted to examine the direct and indirect impact of physical defects
upon personality. Obesity is one of the popular physical defect. Obesity
proves to be a handicap in social relationship because the obese person is
unable to keep up with his contemporaries. Obesity also affects the
personality indirectly. Awareness of unfavourable attitude towards obesity
makes the person feel not only inferior but also they develop the feeling of
being socially scorned. Not only this, some researchers have also pointed
out that massively obese individuals become more disturbed perhaps because
of less self-satisfaction and cumulative adverse comment from others.


===== PAGE 6 =====
10
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Health conditions
Health conditions also affect the development of personality. At all ages and in
both sexes good health is considered as a personality asset and poor health is a
liability. There are ample evidences to support it. Many personality changes result
from poor health conditions and tend to continue even after the illness has been
cured or its severity has been lessened. This is especially true during childhood
when the personality is in the formative stages. Many personality changes and
disturbances in adolescents and adults have their root in illnesses during the
early years of childhood (Martin & Vincent, 1960).
It has also been found that persons having illness like diabetes, etc., experience
tension and anxiety which causes frustration in dealing with the demands of
social environments. As a result of frustration, they become aggressive and often
turn their aggression towards others. Physical disturbances like the female
irregular menstrual cycle often lead to emotional instability accompanied by a
tendency to be irritable and depressed. This increases their level of emotionality
and the heightened emotionality is reflected in poor social adjustment and decrease
in social activities, ultimately affecting women’s self-concept and the attitudes
towards other people.
Self Assessment Questions 2
1) Tall and thin body builds are the characteristics of:
a) Mesomorph b) Ectomorph
c) Endomorph d) None of these.
2) Homeostatis refers to:
a) Disturbances in the internal balance of the body
b) Maintenance of a stable internal environment
c) Maintenance of even rate of oxygen utilisation
d) Maintenance of normal level of blood sugar and blood pressure.
3) Homeostasis affects the self-concept:
a) Only in a positive way b) Only in a negative way
c) Both positively and negatively d) Has no effect.
4) Which is Not the physical determinants of personality?
a) Homeostasis b) Physical attractiveness
c) Body builds d) Gender
5) High blood pressure is generally associated with causation of:
a) Neuroticism b) Depression
c) General nervousness d) None of these.
1.3.2 Psychological Factors
Several psychological factors tend to determine the development of personality.
Among those factors the following can be specially discussed because of their
importance. These include:


===== PAGE 7 =====
11
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
i) Intellectual determinants
ii) Emotional determinants
iii) Self disclosure
iv) Aspiration and achievements
The above are being discussed in the following paragraphs.
1.3.2.1 Intellectual Determinants
These are one of the important factors which influence the development of
personality. Researchers are of view that intellectual capacities influence
personality through various kinds of adjustments in life and indirectly through
the judgments other persons make of the individual on the basis of the person’s
intellectual achievements.
This judgment in turn affects the evaluation and consequently the development
of personality. Intellectually bright men and women make better personal and
social adjustments than those of average or below average intelligence.
Several studies bear testimony to the fact that bright men and women are generally
introspective, thoughtful, creative, adventuresome and have strong concern with
problems, meanings and values. They are found to show a wider interest especially
in the theoretical and aesthetic areas. Since they have greater and stronger mental
ability, they have better control over themselves.
However, having very superior intelligence affects personality development
unfavourably because it creates special problems which are not encountered by
those persons who are merely bright. These various problems result in the
development of a personality pattern, which is characterised by the traits like
negativism, intolerance, habits of chicanery, emotional conflicts, solitary pursuit,
self-sufficiency, dominance, etc. Evidences also have provided support to the
fact that intellectual capacities also influence development of values, morality
and human.
1.3.2.2  Emotional Determinants
These are other important factors that shape the development of personality.
Emotions are considered important personality determinants because they affect
personal and social adjustment. Research has shown that several aspects of
emotions like dominant emotions, emotional balance, emotional deprivation,
excessive love and affection, emotional expressions, emotional catharsis and
emotional stress directly and indirectly affect the development of personality.
Some people experience a predominance of pleasant emotions while others
experience a predominance of unpleasant emotions. This predominance affect
the development of personality. The cheerful persons are usually happy and even
when they are in a depressive mood they can see the brighter side of things.
Likewise, since apprehensive persons are full of fear, they even when there is ja
happy or enjoyable situation, feel depressed and remain afraid. Emotional balance
which is a condition in which pleasant emotions outweigh the unpleasant emotion,
is considered essential to good social and personal adjustment.
When the person encounters with obstacles and problems, unpleasant experiences
like fear, anger, envy and other negative emotions are aroused. As a consequence,


===== PAGE 8 =====
12
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
the person’s adjustments are adversely affected. Such conditions in the long run
are responsible for development of many pathological traits in the person. Also
emotional deprivation of pleasant emotions like love, happiness and curiosity
also has an impact, which gradually leads to poor personal and social adjustment.
Research has revealed that impact of emotional deprivation depends upon the
extent to which a person is wmotionally deprived in addition to the duration of
emotional deprivation as well as upon the age at which it occurs. One of the
common effects of deprivation of love and affection is the development of
emotional insecurity. Much of adolescent and adult rebellion against authority
stems from emotional insecurity which has its origin in unstable affectional
relationship with parents and other members of family during early childhood
years.
1.3.2.3  Excessive Love and Affection
This also has psychologically negative effect. Sigmund Freud had earlier cautioned
that too much parental love and affection awakens a disposition for neurotic
disorders, spoils the child and makes the individual a problematic adolescent.
Strecker (1956) has pointed out that excessive mothering, that is, overprotective
mothers turn their sons and daughters into immature and dependent adults.
Emotional expression, that is, how the person expresses emotion also affects the
development of personality. If the person is able to express emotions in a socially
approved manner, that person would be judged favourably and this provides a
good mirror image of the self. Such emotional expression produces a better feeling
both physically and mentally because homeostasis can be restored.
Sanctions, control over the overt expression of emotions is often necessary to
avoid social disapproval. However, repression of emotions like anger, fear,
jealously, and envy makes the individual gloomy and morbid which ultimately
produces behaviour like extreme laziness, lack of interest in people, vacillation
of mood etc. Emotional Catharsis (release of unexpressed emotions) also
contributes to the development of good adjustment. Release of pent up emotions
allows for physical and mental homeostasis to be restored. As a consequence,
the person can judge oneself in a more realistic way.
1.3.2.4  Self-disclosure
Self disclosure is considered basic to mental health and such disclosure helps to
bring about a healthy personality pattern which is a guarantee for a socially
desirable and favourable reactions from others. Emotional stress expressed in
the form of anxiety, frustration, jealousy and envy also affect the development of
personality. A person who suffers from emotional stress makes good personal
and social adjustments. Intense emotional stress may motivate the person to go
to excesses in hope of being relieved from it. For example, the person may resort
to overeating and using drugs to dull the intense feeling of insecurity caused by
emotional stress. It has been reported that women who experience greater degree
of emotional stress during menstrual period, are found to develop depressive
tendencies. Psychologists have shown that people with low self-esteem are more
adversely affected by emotional stress than those with high self-esteem.


===== PAGE 9 =====
13
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
1.3.2.5 Aspiration and Achievements
These also have an effect on the development of personality. Aspiration means a
longing for and striving for something higher than one’s present status. Thus
aspirations are the ego-involved goals that persons set for themselves. The more
ego-involved the aspirations are, the more will be the impact upon behaviour
and therefore, greater will be the impact upon personality. There may be various
forms of aspirations such as positive aspiration (to achieve success), negative
aspiration (to avoid failure), realistic aspiration (within the range of the person’s
capacity), unrealistic aspirations (beyond the capacity of the person), remote
aspirations (to achieve a goal in the remote future) or immediate aspirations (to
achieve a goal in the near future).
The motivating power of aspiration varies. In general, remote and realistic
aspirations do provide stronger motivating forces than immediate and unrealistic
aspirations. Negative aspirations are considered weaker in providing motivating
strength than positive aspirations.
Level of aspiration, that is, the discrepancy between the goal an individual has
achieved and the goal the person hopes to reach, affects the personality in terms
of the size of the discrepancy. When the size of discrepancy is large, the person’s
self-concept is severely damaged especially if the person fails to achieve the
goal. Not only the individual will judge self as failure but others will also judge
the person as a failure in particular if others know about the person’s goal and
that goal had not been achieved.
Research studies have also shown that high aspirations are not necessarily a
source of damage to the self-concept. They may be a source of motivation and
pleasure. They may be a kind of wishful thinking that will not cause any damage
to personality so long as it remains a form of fun and play.
1.3.2.6 Achievements
These are another related factor that determine the development of personality.
Achievement can be evaluated objectively by comparing one’s performance with
those of one’s peers and subjectively, by comparing the person’s achievement
with the level of aspiration. Success and failure are the two different attitudes of
the person towards achievement. If the person is pleased with own achievement,
the achievement will be considered a success and this has a favourable impact
upon the self-concept. However if the person’s attitude towards achievement is
negative, then the achievement will not be considered a success but a failure.
Such persons will feel dissatisfied and miserable and in turn their self concept
will be adversely affected. Persons who feel that they have been successful remain
satisfied with themselves and appear to be happy.
Besides building a favourable self-concept, achievement also raises the person’s
self-esteem and increases the level of self-confidence so that the individual can
solve the many new problem of the future successfully. In addition to the personal
satisfaction that a person derives from achieving the goal successfully, the
achievement ensures that the person is appropriate in all the actions that are
taken up, which in turn produce a stabilising impact upon the behaviour.
Therefore, a successful person tends to be more relaxed than a person who has
experiences of failure.


===== PAGE 10 =====
14
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
1.3.2.7 Goal Setting
Experimental evidences have shown that one of the most important effect that
success has upon the person is that the individual becomes more realistic about
goal setting. Such persons would asset their goal to a point where they have
reasonable chances of reaching. This behaviour is an obvious characteristic of
intelligenct, well-adjusted people than of those who are poorly adjusted.
Success enhances self-concept by increasing the person’s prestige in the eyes of
others. This enhances social acceptance and strengthens the individual’s self-
concept. But too much success during early years of life may, in fact, weakens
the person’s motivation to do one’s best. It may cause the person to loose some
of the new motivations which can be generated by early achievement.
Extraordinary achievement even may prove to be more harmful than helpful to
social relationship and not only that, it may arouse jealousy and resentment among
those persons who are socially related to the person but somehow less successful.
Failure is another constituent of achievement. It is always ego-deflating. Failure
undermines the self-confidence and self-esteem. Gradually, it destroys the person’s
belief that she or he can do something to achieve and this, in effect, weakens the
motive to achieve even those things which are within his or her capability. Severe
and repeated failure causes stress, anxiety and tension. Sometimes such repeated
failures cause so intense stress and anxiety that it produces psychosomatic illness
or leads to a defeatist attitude, which strengthens the person’s belief in his or her
inadequacy and intensifies the poor personal and social adjustment. Research
have revealed that one of the most damaging aspects of failure is somehow not
achieving the desired goal and social recognition, especially when the person
hoped to do so. This sense of dissatisfaction is intensified by the realisation that
others with whom the person has competed, have achieved the success much
earlier than him or her. Under such conditions, the impact upon the self concept
is highly unfavourable.
By contrast, one of the greatest source of satisfaction is to achieve success,
recognition and prestige much earlier than anticipated and earlier than one’s
competitors. This condition has favourable impact upon the self-concept.
Sometimes it may be so much favourable that it may lead to the delusion of
grandeur and superiority complex and this condition, in the long term, may
counteract favourable social judgement and prove damaging to the self-concept.
Self Assessment Questions 3
1) Markedly superior intelligence leads to a personality pattern which is
characterised by :
a) negativism b) Intolerance
c) emotional conflicts d) All the above.
2) Which one of the followings is known as mental health insurance ?
a) Emotional balance b) Tolerance
c) Envy tolerance d) None of these.
3) Emotional starvation occurs due to :
a) Emotional deprivation b) Deprivation of love
c) Emotional imbalance d) None of these.


===== PAGE 11 =====
15
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
4) Which one qualifies to be called as emotional stress ?
a) a specific state of heightened emotionality
b) a generalised state of heightened emotionality
c) a generalised state of emotional imbalance
d) none of these above condition.
5) Who are more adversely affected by stress ?
a) people with high self-esteem
b) people with high emotional catharsis
c) people with low self-esteem
d) people with poor emotional catharsis.
1.3.3 Environmental Factors
Besides physical and psychological factors, some environmental factors have
been isolated and shown to have a significant impact upon the development of
personality. Under environmental determinants, the following four sets of factors
have been primarily emphasised :
1.3.3.1 Social Acceptance
These are one of the major environmental determinants. Every person lives in a
social group, which judges the person’s behaviour in terms of the person’s
conformity to group expectations regarding proper performance behaviour and
appropriate role playing. Thus social judgement serve as basis for self-evaluation.
In this way, the social group tends to influence the development of self-concept.
The degree of influence the social group has on personality development depends
not alone on how well accepted the individual is but also on how much importance
social acceptance has for the individual. If the person places more value on group
acceptance, that person will be more willing to be influenced by the group. Persons
who are widely accepted and liked by the group, are likely to respond in a
congenial and friendly spirit than those who experience hostility, disregard and
rejection in the group.
In fact, how much influence social acceptance has on behaviour depends upon
two conditions: how much security a person has in his/her status in the group
and what importance he/she attaches to the social acceptance. If the person feels
fully secure in the status, which would make the person free to act as he/she
wishes and will not be greatly influenced by suggestions from others. Likewise,
if the person attaches more value to the social acceptance, he/she will also be
more susceptible to be in line with the group members.
Persons whose social acceptance is very high, they are generally more outgoing,
more flexible, more active and daring than those who are only moderately socially
accepted or moderately popular. However, such persons often fail to establish
close relationship with people. They also fail to show emotional warmth which
is considered essential to close and intimate personal relationship. This sense of
aloofness usually comes from a feeling of superiority.


===== PAGE 12 =====
16
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
One extreme opposite of social acceptance is social isolation. If a person develops
the feelings of rejection due to social isolation when in fact they want to be
accepted, would develop the feeling of resentment against those who have rejected
them. Such people are often depressed, sad and unhappy. They may develop
sour-grapes attitude towards social activities. Such social rejection may lead the
persons to become juvenile delinquents or criminals in the long run. Researchers
have further shown that if early social experiences of the persons are favourable,
they are likely to become social and if their experiences are unfavourable, they
are likely to develop an unsocial or antisocial personality.
1.3.3.2 Social Deprivation
This is another environmental factor, which is said to influence the development
of personality in massive and significant way. Social deprivation means being
deprived of opportunities for various types of social contacts including love and
affection. Social deprivation causes social isolation which has an adverse effect
on personality. Social deprivation has proved most damaging for two age groups—
the very young and the elderly. The young children who are deprived of contacts
with parents / guardians fail to develop healthy and normal personality. Their
behaviour is socially disapproved and they are also unfavourably judged by others.
Social deprivation in elderly people make them self-bound and selfish, which
gradually lead to unfavourable social and self judgements. It has also been
observed that social deprivation is far more damaging to people who want and
also need social contacts for happiness than those who are self-sufficient or who
voluntarily withdraw. For example, when elderly persons voluntarily decide on
their own to withdraw from social activities, they are far happier and relatively
well adjusted in comparison to those whose withdrawal is involuntary. If social
deprivation is extensive and prolonged, it gradually leads to unhealthy social
attitudes and mental illness.
1.3.3.3 Educational Factors
Another important factor, which influences the development of personality is
the educational factors. Schools, colleges and teachers have significant impact
upon the individual’s development of personality. The impact of educational
institution upon personality development is largely determined by the students’
attitude towards school and colleges, towards peers, towards teachers and also
toward the value of education. When these attitudes are favourable, the students
usually enjoy their academic activities and have a warm and friendly relationship
with teachers and their peers. This has a very favourable impact upon the
development of personality by producing stronger sense of self-confidence and
self-esteem.
The reverse is true when there is unfavourable attitudes amongst students towards
education and educational institutions, teachers and peers etc. . Research studies
have further revealed that if the students are physically and psychologically ready
to enter the school or colleges, their attitude tend to be far more favourable.
Attitude towards educational institution is greatly influenced by emotional climate
of the institution, which affect the level of motivation, students’ classroom
behaviour and their general emotional reactions. Through these various
behavioural patterns, the emotional climate of the educational institution affects
the students’ self-evaluation and the evaluation others make of them.


===== PAGE 13 =====
17
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
Another important factor of educational determinants that affect personality is
student-teacher relationship, which is largely dependent upon the teacher’s
treatment of the students, upon students’ attitude toward particular teachers and
on their teaching as well as the disciplinary techniques used by the teachers
including the cultural stereotypes of teachers as a group. These attitudes, in turn,
affect the quality of the student’s academic work which becomes the basis of
evaluation of self and social evaluation. Teacher student relationship affect the
students’ personality through its impact upon students’ motivation for academic
achievement. When the students see that their relationship with the teacher is
warm and friendly, their achievements are far better than when they perceive the
relationship as hostile, punitive and rejecting. This boosts their self-concept by
enhancing self confidence and self esteem.
1.3.3.4 Family Determinants
This is another important class of factors that influence development of
personality. The influence of family on personality development is maximal at
all ages. The family affects the development of personality both directly or
indirectly. Direct influence of family upon personality comes chiefly through
different child-training methods which are used to mould the personality pattern,
and the communication of interest, attitude and values between members of the
family. Strict, demanding, punitive and inhibiting parents / guardians tend to
encourage their children for depending upon external controls to guide their
behaviour. As a result, when the children are outside the direct control of their
parents/guardian, they tend to show impulsiveness in their behaviour.
Indirectly, through identification with parents, children develop a personality
pattern similar to that of their parents. Experimental studies reveal that through
imitation also, a certain personality pattern develops. For example, living with
parents who are anxious, nervous and lacking the sense of humor produces in
the children a sense of nervousness and frequent outburst of temper. Likewise,
living with warm, affectionate, loving and interested parents generally produces
a social and gregarious persons. Such persons also develop an interest of welfare
and affection for persons outside the home as well.
1.3.3.5 Emotional Climate of Home and Ordinal Position
A very important factor in the development of personality is the emotional climate
at home as well as the ordinal position of the individual concerned within his
family. Ordinal position refers to the eldest or youngest or middle or 2
nd or 3rd
child in the family. If the home climate is favourable, the person will react to
personal problems and frustrations in a calm way and to people in a tolerant and
cooperative way. On the other hand if emotional climate of home is full of friction
and conflicts, the person is more likely to develop a sense of hostility and may
often tend to react to people in an aggressive way.
Ordinal position also affects the development of personality. Studies have revealed
that the firstborns tend to be more conforming and dependent than later borns.
They are more affiliative, more susceptible to group pressures and more
introverted. Firstborns who achieve greater success than the later born siblings
tend to be selfish and self centred. They show their feeling of superiority about
their achievements by making criticism of others. Despite the feelings of
superiority, they continue to suffer from a feeling of insecurity which had


===== PAGE 14 =====
18
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
developed earlier when they were replaced by younger siblings towards which
parents started giving more attention, love and affection. This feeling of insecurity
is responsible for poor personal and social adjustment of the firstborns.
The major personality characteristics of lastborn, as shown by the various
researches, are dependency, affiliative need, lack of self-confidence, lack of
frustration tolerance, defiance of authority, etc. In comparison to the firstborns,
most lastborns have relatively weak achievement motivation. They are generally
not pressed by the members of the family to achieve more nor do most families
care to provide them with the opportunities that were provided to the firstborns.
So far as the middle born or second borns are concerned, they are found to be
generally less family oriented and more peer oriented. From their peer relationship,
they develop such personality traits which produce better personal and social
adjustment. As a result, they are more popular among the peers in comparison to
the first or lastborn.
1.3.3.6   Size of the Family
This factor also affects the development of personality. In larger families parents
have little time to protect any child. As such, children learn to be independent
and show maturity in their behaviour at an earlier age as compared to children of
smaller families. However, larger families encourage certain personality
characteristics that may hamper good personal and social adjustments. For keeping
the home environment reasonably calm, parents of larger families generally adopt
authoritarian method of control, which produces a strong sense of resentment
and rebellion among children. In small families since parents devote enough
time to care and provide proper guidance to each child, this produces self-
confidence, self-assurance and eliminates the feeling of inadequacy which may
come when the child is left to meet the problem alone. However, due to strict
competition for getting parental attention, affection and approval in small families,
jealousy and envy especially against the firstborns who are perceived to be parents’
favourite, damages the self-concept of the concerned individual.
We have seen that the development of personality is shaped by a set of three
factors, namely, physical or biological factors, psychological factors and
environmental factors. There are psychologists like J.B. Watson, father of
Behaviourism, who have outright emphasised upon only one factor, that is
environmental factor ignoring the role of other two sets of factor in development
of personality. He had emphatically proclaimed that give him a child, he will
make him either a doctor or a beggar or a engineer or a thief irrespective of his
abilities. Today there is little support for such statement and there is almost an
unanimity among the personality psychologists regarding the basic view that the
physical or biological factors provide a boundary for the development of
personality and within this general boundary, personality is developed or shaped
under the influence of various psychological and environmental factors. Therefore,
it can be concluded that development of personality can be explained in terms of
the following equation:
Personality Development = Physical determinants × Psychological determinants
× Environmental determinants


===== PAGE 15 =====
19
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
Self Assessment Questions 4
1) Social deprivation generally leads to :
a) Social rejection b) Social discrimination
c) Negative self-concept d) None of these.
2) Mohan, leader of a group, is more colourful, more flexible, more active
in his approach. It all happens because he has :
a) Social acceptance b) Social support
c) Social status d) All the above.
3) Within a group when the person status changes such as from follower
to leader or the vice versa, it is termed as :
a) Social mobility b) Changes in group status
c) Social stereotype d) None of these.
4. Which has the most lasting impact upon the development of personality
of a student ?
a) Academic success b) T eacher’s attitude and behaviour
c) Teacher-studente relationship d) All of the above.
5) Which size of the family is considered ideal for development of pesonality?
a) Small families b) Medium-size families
c) Large families d) None.
1.4 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we learnt about personality. We pointed out as to how the term
personality is often understood in terms of social attractiveness. We pointed out
the scientific approach to personality development which explain the concept of
personality in terms of individuality and consistency.  Another important notion
in defining the concept of personality is consistency. Combining these notions
of individuality and consistency, personality can be defined as the distinctive
and unique ways in which each individual thinks, feels and acts, which
characterise a person’s response throughout life. In other words, it can be said
that personality refers to all those relatively permanent traits, dispositions or
characteristics within the person that give some measure of consistency to the
person’s behaviour. These traits may be unique, common to some groups or
shared by the entire species but their pattern will be different from individual to
individual.
Behaviours of an individual seem to fit together in a meaningful way. It is to be
kept in mind that the nature of behaviours is dynamic and there may occur changes
in the organisation and structure of behaviours over a period of time.  It is in this
sense that Allport (1937, 1961), defined personality as the dynamic organisation
within the person of the psychophysical systems that determine the unique
adjustments to one’s environment.
Then we took up personality development and pointed out as to how psychologists
have tried to identity factors which directly or indirectly influence the growth
and development of personality. Although there are a large number of factors,


===== PAGE 16 =====
20
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
which influence the development of personality, such factors have been broadly
grouped into three general categories and these are given below.
i) Biological factors
ii) Pscyhological factors and
iii) Environmental factors.
Since these factors tend to determine the way personality develops they are also
called as determinants of personality. These were discussed in detail. Biological
factors consisted of  body build, physical attractiveness, homeostasis, physical
defects and health conditions. The psychological factors consisted of intellectual
factors, emotional factors including excessive love and affection, self disclosure,
aspiration and achievement and goal setting behaviour. and environmental factors
consisted of social acceptance, social deprivation, educational factors, family
emotional climate, ordinal position of the individual in the family and size of the
family.  Finally it was concluded that personality development takes place through
learning processes including imitation.
1.5 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Define personality. Citing example, make distinction between temperament
and character.
2) Discuss the physical or biological determinants of personality development.
3) Outline the role of psychological determinants of personality development.
4) Discuss the role of environmental determinants in shaping personality
development.
5) Enumerate the basic formula : Personality Development = Physical
determinants  × Psychological determinants × Environmental determinants
1.6 SUGGESTED READINGS
Coon, D. (2007). Introduction to Psychology: Thompson.
Wood, S.E. & Wood, E.G . (1996). The World of Psychology: Allyn & Bacon
Ryckman, R.M (1993). Theories of Personality : Brooks / Cole Publishing
Company.
1.7 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT
QUESTIONS
1) 1. (b) 2 (d) 3. (a) 4. (c) 5. (b)
2) 1. (b) 2. (b) 3. (c) 4. (d) 5. (a)
3) 1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (b) 4. (b) 5. (c)
4) 1. (c) 2. (a) 3. (a) 4. (c) 5. (d)


===== PAGE 17 =====
21
Definition and Concept of
Personality and Personality
Development
UNIT 2 STATE/TRAIT APPROACHES TO
PERSONALITY
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Objectives
2.2 Type Approaches to Personality
2.3 Trait Approaches/Theories
2.3.1 Allport’s Trait Approach
2.3.1.1 Common and Individual Traits
2.3.1.2 Cardinal Traits
2.3.1.3 Central Traits
2.3.1.4 Secondary Traits
2.3.2 Cattell’s Trait Approach
2.3.3 Eysenck’s Type/Trait Hierarchy
2.3.3.1 Extraversion/Introversion
2.3.3.2 Psychoticism/Impulse Control
2.3.3.3 Inhibition Theory
2.3.3.4 Arousal Theory
2.3.4 Guilford’s Trait Theory
2.3.4.1 Physiological and Morphological Traits
2.3.4.2 Needs, Interests, Attitudes
2.3.4.3 Aptitudes
2.3.4.4 Temperament
2.3.5 Five Factor Model
2.3.5.1 Extraversion (E)
2.3.5.2 Neuroticism (N)
2.3.5.3 Consientiousness (C)
2.3.5.4 Agreeableness (A)
2.3.5.5 Openness (O)
2.4 Let Us Sum Up
2.5 Unit End Questions
2.6 Suggested Readings
2.7 Answers to Self Assessment Questions
2.0 INTRODUCTION
A large umber of approaches to studying the personality have been put forward
by many theorists. One of these is the type and trait approaches and these have
been especially attributed to a few major theorists. In this unit we will take up
first of all the Type approaches to personality and herein we will discuss the triat
approach by Allport to describe personality. This will be followed by the trait
approach by Cattell who gave emphasis on source and surface traits. Following
this we will be dealing with Eysenck’s trait and type approach to personality.
Next will be the discussion of Guilford’s theory which again is a trait approach.
This is followed by the relatively more recent Five Facotr Model of personality.


===== PAGE 18 =====
22
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.1 OBJECTIVES
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
• Define personality;
• Describe Allport’s trait theory approach;
• Elucidate the factors contributtuing to Allport’s theory of personality;
• Describe Cattell’s trait theory to understanding personality;
• Explain the factors contributing to Cattell’s personality theory;
• Elucidate Eysenck’s theory of trait and type apprioach;
• Explain the factors contributing to Extraversion, neuroticism and
psychoticism;
• Elucidate the Trait approach of Guilford to personality;
• Analyse the factors contributing to Guilford’s idea of personality
development;
• Elucidate the Five Factor Model of personality; and
• Describe and analyse OCEAN.
2.2 TYPE APPROACHES TO PERSONALITY
The earliest effort to explain human behaviour involved the use of personality
typologies, which classified behaviour into discrete, all-or-nothing categories.
For example, Hippocrates a Greek Physician (and later on Galen, too) classified
individuals into four exclusive types according to four basic internal fluids or
humors, each associated with a particular temperament. These four basic fluids
were : blood, phelgm, black bile and yellow bile. The dominance of any one
fluid led to a particular personality temperament. For example, dominance of
blood produced Sanguine temperament (cheerful and active), dominance of
phelgm produced Phlegmatic temperament (apathetic and sluggish), the
dominance of black bile produced Melancholic temperament (sad and brooding)
and dominance of yellow bile produced Choleric temperament (irritable and
exitable). This is known as four-humor theory and remained popular for centuries
although today it is regarded as a baseless theory because it has been established
now that personality and moods are not driven by bodily fluids. Later on the
basis of observation of patients, Hippocrates pointed out that people with short
and thick bodies were prone to stroke and those with tall, thin bodies to
tuberculosis.
Another interesting typologies were that of William Sheldon, a U.S.A. Physician.
He tried to relate physique to temperament. On the basis of somatotype (body
build), he assigned each individual to one of the three categories , viz., (i)
ectomorphic (thin, long and fragile), (ii) endomorphic (fat, soft and round) and
(iii) mesomorphic (muscular, strong and rectangular). According to Sheldon,
ectomorphs are artistic, brainy and introverted, endomorphs are relaxed, fond of
eating, sleeping and sociable whereas mesomorphs are affective, dominant, filled
with energy and courage.


===== PAGE 19 =====
23
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Sheldon’s theory has not been substantiated and has proved of little value in
predicting individual behaviour (Tylor, 1965). In addition, people belonged to
many different shape and size and not all can be fitted to the Sheldon’s three
types.
MBTI (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator) typology is another typology which is
modern one and based upon Carl Jung’s theory of personality types. Using the
MBTI, individual’s selfreported preferences are used to assess four dimensions
of personality: E or I (Extraversion- Introversion), S or N (Sensing or Intution),
T or F (Thinking-Feeling) and J or P (Judgement-Perception). The MBTI identifies
16 types of personality based on Jung’s distinctions between E-I, S-N and T-F, as
well as upon Isobel Myer’s distinction between J-P . The J-P distinction indicates
as to whether an individual’s orientation toward the external world comes from
rational (judging) or the irrational (perceiving) function pair. If a person takes
MBTI, he would be assigned to only one pole of each dimension and the
combination of dimensions would determine which of the sixteen types best
describes him. For example, a person who receives ESFP (Extraverted-Sensing-
Feeling-Perception) classification would be characterised as outgoing, easygoing,
accepting, friendly and would be considered best in situations that need sound
common sense and practical ability with people as well as with things.
The Myers-Briggs is a very good type system because its categories are distinct
or discontinuous and people of any one type are supported to be very much like
each other that help them to be distinguished from other types. Critics of MBTI
state that while the four dimensions are informative, persons should be described
according to their actual scores on each dimension rather then being mixed into
types.
Type approach to personality apparently fails in its mission to provide a
satisfactory classification system because there are many people who cannot be
fitted into prescribed type. Today, psychologists prefer to describe people not in
terms of type rather in terms of traits. Types are not descriptive of the persons. In
fact, they rob the uniqueness of persons by placing the persons into a perconceived
category. Thus type exists in the eye of beholder whereas traits exist within the
people.
2.3 TRAIT APPROACHES/THEORIES
These approaches explain personality in terms of traits, which are defined as
relatively stable and consistent personal characteristics. Trait approach attempts
to explain personality and differences between people in terms of their personal
characteristics, to devise ways of measuring individual differences in personality
traits and to use these measures for understanding and predicting a person’s
behaviour. Type approach assume that there are separate, and discontinuous
categories into which persons fit whereas trait approach assumes that there are
continuous dimensions such as warmth, extraversion, etc. that vary in quality as
well as degree.
Under the trait approach, the viewpoints of Allport, Cattell, Eysenck Guilford,
and the Five Factor Model would be discussed in detail.


===== PAGE 20 =====
24
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.3.1 Allport’s Trait Approach
Allport is regarded as one of the most important and influential personality
theorists. Several years ago, Allport went through the English Dictionary and
painstakingly recorded a list of 17,953 words that described personal traits (Alport
& Odbert, 1936). Obviously it would be impractical to describe persons in terms
of where they fall on roughly 18,000 traits. However, on the basis of these words,
attempt was made to propose traits like dominance, friendlines, self-esteem, etc.
This is called lexical approach to define personality trait.
Fort Allport, traits are the building blocks of personality as well as the source of
individuality. He is known as idiographic trait theorist who has a strong belief
that each person has some unique as well as some common characteristics that
together form a unique combination of traits. For Allport, trait is something that
exits but remains invisible. It is located somewhere in the nervous system
(Ryckman, 1993).
We infer the existence of a trait by observing consistencies in the behaviour of
the person. Dissimilar stimuli tend to arouse a trait readiness within the person
and then trait manifests itself through the varieties of different responses. All
these responses are equivalent in the sense that they serve the function of
expression of trait.
To illustrate this, let us take an example of an employee working in the university
office. His shyness is inferred from his inability to establish friendship with
others, his avoidance of social gatherings of the employees, his enjoyment with
solitary entertainment activities and his unwillingness to participate in discussion,
etc.
2.3.1.1 Common and Individual Traits
Allport recognised two major categories of traits:
i) Common traits and
ii) Individual traits.
Common traits are those traits which we share in common with many others in
our culture. For example being quiet, showing due respect to seniors and making
polite behaviour to others are the traits we share with others in Indian culture.
This illustrates the common traits.
Individual traits or also called personal dispositions are those traits which are
unique to the person concerned and Allport regarded individual traits to be more
important than common traits.
According to him, there are three types of individual traits
2.3.1.2 Cardinal Traits
A cardinal trait is a trait which is so pervasive, dominant and outstanding in life
that every behaviour seems traceable to its influence. Most people do not have
cardinal traits but those who have them, are well-known by those traits. For
instance, Mahatma Gandhi was having the cardinal traits of peace-loving and
strong faith in non-violence for which he is well known.


===== PAGE 21 =====
25
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
2.3.1.3 Central Traits
Central traits are those traits which are generally listed in a carefully written
letter of recommendation. In fact, any trait name like friendliness, dominance,
self-centeredness would be the example of central trait. Every person has several
central traits and there are five to ten most outstanding traits in each person
around which a person’s life focuses.
2.3.1.4 Secondary Traits
Secondary traits are traits which are less conspicuous, less consistent, less
generalised and less relevant to the definition of personality. For example, food
habits, hair style, and specific attitudes are examples of secondary traits.
All these traits are dynamic in the sense that they possess motivational power.
Those individual traits or dispositions which are intensely experienced are said
to be more motivational. Those individual traits which are less intensively
experienced though possessing more motivational power are said to be more
stylistic.
Whether motivational or stylistics, some individual traits are close to the core of
the person’s personality whereas some are at the periphery.
According to Allport, all these individual traits form structure of personality
which, in turn, determines the behaviour of an individual. In his view only by
focussing upon the uniqueness of the individual, a scientific and substantial
understanding of personality is possible.
Allport also held that personality is not a mere bundle of unrelated traits, rather
it embodies a unity, consistency and integration of traits. This integration work
is accomplished by self or ‘Proprium’ as Allport has named it. In his view the
Proprium or self develops continuously from infancy to death and during this
period it moves through a series of stages.
Self Assessment Questions 1
1) Allport was supporter of:
a) Nomothetic approach to personality
b) Trait approach to personality
c) Idiograhic approach to personality
d) Both b and c
2) Your hair style will be the example of:
a) Cardinal trait b) Secondary trait
c) Central trait d) None of these
3) Allport emphasised more upon:
a) Common trait b) Individual traits
c) Proprium e) None of these.


===== PAGE 22 =====
26
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 4) Following Allport, the trait which is a defining characteristic of one’s
personality is :
a) Individual trait b) Common trait
c) Cardinal trait d) Secondary trait.
5) You have just been told by counsellor that on the basis of Myers-Briggs
personality test you are an ESTP . Your counsellor apparently favours
which of the following approaches to personality :
a) Trait approach b) Type appraoch
c) Psychodynamic approach d) Type approach
2.3.2 Cattell’s Trait Approach
Raymond Cattell (1950) considered personality to be a pattern of traits providing
the key to understanding it and predicting a person’s behaviour. According to
him, traits are relatively permanent and broad reaction tendencies of personality.
They serve as the building blocks of personality. He distinguished between (i)
surface trait and source trait, (ii) constitutional and environmental-mold traits
(iii) ability, temperament and dynamic traits.
i) Surface traits and source traits
The observable qualities of a personality like kindness, honesty, helpfulness,
generosity, etc. are named as surface traits. Allport has called these qualities or
traits as central traits. Using questionnaires and observations, Cattell studied
several thousand people and he reported certain cluster of surface traits that
appeared together from time to time. He further reported that these were the
clear evidence of some deeper, more general underlying personality factors, and
he referred to these as source traits.
Source traits make up the most basic structure of personality and are the underlying
factors that are responsible for the inter-correlation among surface traits. Although
source traits are smaller in number than surface traits, yet they are better predictors
of human behaviour. We all possess the same source traits but we do not possess
them in the same amount. For example, intelligence is an example of source trait
and everyone of us possesses this but we all do not possess intelligence in the
same amount.
Cattell found 23 source traits in normal persons and 16 of which he studied in
detail. These 16 basic source traits were then used in the construction of the
Sixteen Personality (16PF) Questionnaire popularly knows as “16 PF test”. The
sixteen factors identified by Cattell include (i) Reserved vs outgoing, (ii) less
intelligent vs more intelligent, (iii) emotional vs. stable (iv) humble vs. assertive,
(v) sober vs. happy-go-lucky, (vi) expedient vs. conscientious, (vii) shy vs.
ventursame, (viii) tough-minded vs. tender-minded, (ix) trusting vs. suspicious,
(x) practical vs. imaginative, (xi) forthright vs. shrewd (xii) placid vs.
apprehensive, (xiii) conservative vs. experimenting, (xiv) group-tied vs. self-
sufficiency, (xv) casual vs. controlled, and (xvi) relaxed vs. tense.
In addition to these 16 factors measured by personality test, Cattell, on the basis
of his subsequent researches proposed seven new factors : excitability, zeppia
vs. Coasthenia, boorishness vs. mature socialisation, sanguine casualness, group
dedication with sensed inadequacy and social panache vs. explicit expression.


===== PAGE 23 =====
27
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Although the sixteen source traits utilised in 16PF can be used to make distinction
between normals and neurotics, they fail to assess all aspects of deviant behaviour
as well as the characteristics of psychotics. Using factor analysis to the surface
traits of the normal and abnormal personality spheres, Cattell derived 12 new
factors that measure psychopathological traits, such as hypochondriasis,
zestfulness, brooding discontent, anxious depression, energy euphoria, guilt and
resentment, bored depression, paranoia, psychopathic deviation, schizophremia,
psychesthenia and general psychosis. All these traits are in bipolar format. These
12 factors have been combined with 16 PF in the construction of new test called
Clinical Analysis Questionnaire (CAQ). With the construction of CAQ, Cattell
was of the view that he has identified major source traits of both normal and
abnormal personality.
ii) Constitutional and environmental traits
Cattell also distinguished between constitutional traits and environmental mold
traits. Constitutional traits are those traits which are determined by nature or
biology whereas environmental mold traits are those which are determined by
nurture that is by experience gained in interaction with environment.
Most surface traits, for Cattell, reflects a mixture of both heredity (nature) and
environment (nurture).  However, he further points out that there are some source
traits which derive solely from within the individual (biology of the individual)
and there are some source traits which derive solely from source derived only
from environmental factors. Through a complicated statistical technique called
MA V A (Multiple Abstract V ariance Analysis), he was able to assess the degree
to which various traits are determined either by environmental or genetically
determined factors. MA V A is based upon the comparisons between people of the
same family either reared together or reared apart or between members of different
families reared either together or apart.
iii) Ability, temperament and dynamic traits
Cattell has further subdivided traits into ability traits, temperament traits and
dynamic traits.
Ability traits refer to the person’s skill in dealing with the environment and the
goals set therein. Intelligence is an example of ability trait.
Temperament traits refer to stylistic tendencies that largely show how a person
moves towards a goal. Being moody, irritable, easygoing are examples of
temperament trait.
Dynamic traits are the person’s motivation and interest which set the person in
action toward the goal. A person may be characterised as being power-seeking,
ambitious or sports-oriented. This relfects the dynamic trait. The important
dynamic traits in Cattell’s system are of three types, viz. (i) attitudes, (ii) ergs
and (iii) sentiments.
Attitudes are dynamic surface traits which display specific manifestations of
underlying motives. Ergs are constitutional dynamic source trait. It is through
ergs that cattell has given due recognition to innately determined but modifiable
impellents of behaviour. Ten ergs like hunger, sex, gregariousness, parental
protectiveness, curiosity, escape, pugnacity, acquisitiveness, self-assertion and


===== PAGE 24 =====
28
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
narcissistic sex have been recognised by Cattell. Sentiment focusses on social
object and it is an environmental mold dynamic source trait. Thus it is more or
less parallel to ergs except that it results from experimental or socio-cultural
factors.
Self Assessment Questions 2
1) The inter-correlation among surface traits leads to development of an
inference about:
a) Temperament trait b) Erg
c) Source trait d) None of there
2) Erg belongs to the category of:
a) Temperament trait b) Dynamic trait
c) Ability trait d) None.
3) Which of the following is not assessed by clinical Analysis
questionnaire?
a) Energy Euphoria b) Bored dpression
c) Schizophrenia d) Shyness.
4) Friendliness is an example of:
a) Source trait b) Surface trait
c) Temperament trait d) None.
5) According to Cattell which trait causes behaviour for predictable
purposes:
a) Surface trait b) Abiity trait
c) Source trait d) Dynamic trait.
2.3.3 Eysenck’s Type/ Trait Hierarchy
British Psychologist Hans Eysenck (1990) had a strong belief that personality is
largely determined by genes and that the environmental factors have very little
role to play in it. He opined that personality is more or less stable and enduring
organisation of a person’s character, temperament, intellect and physique. In this
definition, he has emphasised upon traits (stable and enduring characteristics)
which when clustered together, constitutes a type.
Eysenek’s viewpoint is personality is hierarchically organised, consisting of types,
traits and habits. At the lowest level of Eysenck’s hierarchy are the single responses
like action or thoughts. Regularly occurring responses form habits and related
habits form traits and several traits clustered together constitute a type or also
known as super factors.
Thus types are most abstract, followed by traits and then by habits and then
finally by responses at the beginning level. In fact, each of the ‘type’ concepts is
based on a set of observed inter correlations among various traits. Each ‘trait’ is
inferred from inter correlations among habitual responses. Habitual responses
are, in turn, based upon specific observable responses.


===== PAGE 25 =====
29
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Thus the entire process can be explained through an example.  It is known that
‘extraversion’ is based upon observed inter correlations among the traits like
liveliness, sociability, activity, and excitability. Each of these traits is inferred
from inter correlations among habitual responses such as for instance going to
club, liking to talk with people, taking part in any social activity on the spur of
the moment and so forth. These habits are themselves inferred from some
observable specific responses like real occasion where the person actually went
to club, talked with people, participated in group discussion, etc.
Based upon numerous factor analyses on personality data gathered from different
populations, Eysenck derived two major factors or dimensions of personality,
viz.,
i) Extraversion/Introversion
ii) Neuroticism/stability.
Later, on the basis of other statistical analysis, he postulated a third dimension,
viz.,
iii) Psychoticism/Impulse control.
These three dimensions, according to Eysenck, are the major individual difference
types considered most useful in describing personality functioning. To measure
these three dimensions of personality, Eysenck developed a paper and pencil
test. The latest version of the test has been named as Eysenck Personality
Questionnaire (EPQ).
2.3.3.1 Extraversion/Introversion
Extraverts are individuals who are sociable and impulsive and who like excitement
and oriented toward external reality. Introverts are introspective persons who are
more oriented toward inner reality and tend to exhibit preference towards a well-
ordered life. Neurotics are emotionally unstable persons. The hallmark of most
neurotics is that they exhibit an anxiety level disproportionate to the realities of
the situation. Some neurotics may exhibit obsessional or impulsive symptoms
and some may show unreasonable fear of objects, persons, places, etc. However,
there are neurotics who are free from the burden of anxiety and fear and in this
group, psychopaths are placed who fail to assess the consequences of their actions
and who behave in antisocial manner regardless of the punishment they get
(Eysenck, 1965).
2.3.3.2 Psychoticism/Impulse Control
Psychotics are characterised by traits such as being insensitive to others, hostile,
at times cruel and inhuman. Despite all the psychopathological traits, Eysenck
believed that psychotics tend to be creative (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). He
based his conclusion on his work with schizophrenics who gave many original
responses on the Rorschach test.
2.3.3.3 Inhibition Theory
Eysenck developed a theory called inhibition theory to explain why people who
differed along the various dimensions should behave differently from one another.
According to Eysenck, individual differences along the extraversion/introversion
dimension are strongly determined by heredity and have their basic origins in
the cerebral Cortex of the central nervous system.


===== PAGE 26 =====
30
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Drawing upon the work of Tephlov (1964) and Pavlov (1927), Eysenck pointed
out that extraverts have relatively stronger inhibitory processes and very weak
excitatory processes. Besides, their nervous systems are strong which forces them
to tolerate a large capacity of stimulation. Introverts, on the other hand, have
very strong excitatory processes and weak inhibitory processes. Apart from this,
their nervous system is weak which means that they have a small capacity to
tolerate stimulation. Thus the brains of extraverts react more slowly and weakly
towards stimuli thereby creating a strong desire for strong sensory stimulation
which causes them to seek excitement by going to parties, making new friends,
and attending to various types of meeting, etc. On the other hand, introverts are
more cortically aroused and their brains react quickly and strongly to stimuli. As
such, they tolerate relatively small amount of stimulation. Consequently, strong
stimulation from the environment proves to be aversive for them and they tend
to spend more time in aloof activities like reading, writing, playing chess, etc.
2.3.3.4 Arousal Theory
Recently, inhibition theory has been replaced by arousal theory by Eysenck
because inhibition and excitation although were very useful concepts, were found
to be extremely difficult to assess. Arousal theory has the advantage of identifying
the physiological systems underlying individual differences in extraversion /
introversion and neuroticism / stability. According to arousal theory, differences
in the behaviour of introverts and extraverts are due to the various parts of
Ascending Rreticular Activating System (ARAS) which is a network of fibers
going upward from the lower brain stem to the thalamus and cortex. Some other
fibers descend from the lower brain stem which influences the activities of bodily
muscles and autonomic nervous system. At the same time, such descending fibers
can also modulate the activity of the brain stem.
Thus the relation between ARAS and cortex become reciprocal, that is , ARAS
activate the cortex, which, in turn, influences ARAS either by increasing or
inhibiting the excitability. Eysenck was of view that introverts have innately
higher levels of arousal than extraverts. As a result, they are more likely to be
sensitive to stimulation. In arousal theory, Eysenck tends to make it explicit that
the seat of neuroticism lies in visceral brain or limbic system.
All structures of visceral brain such as hipocampus, amygdala, cingulum, septum
and hypothalamus are involved in generating emotionality. Since visceral brain
and ARSA are only partially independent from each other, cortical and autonomic
arousal can also be produced by activities of the visceral brain. In particular,
such activities produce arousal in sympathetic nervous system, causing increase
in heart rate, breathing rates and loss of digestion, etc. People showing higher
degree of neuroticism generally have lower thresholds for activity in visceral
brain and greater responsivity of sympathetic nervous system. That is the reason
why neurotics are innately more reactive rather overreacting to even mild forms
of stimulation.
Self Assessment Questions 3
1) What is the correct sequence of organisation in Eysenck type-trait
hierarchy?
a) Trait-Type-Habit-Response
b) Response-Habit-Trait-Type


===== PAGE 27 =====
31
State/Trait Approaches to
Personalityc) Type-Trait-Response-Habit
d) Habit-Response-Trait-Type.
2) Which of the followings is Not assessed by EPQ?
a) Extroversion b) Psychoticism
c) Neuroticism d) Pscyhopathic tendencies.
3) According to Eysenck, which are is Not the characteristic of Psychotics?
a) Psychotics are creative people
b) Psychotics are hostile and cruel
c) Psychotics are inhumane
d) Psychotics are oriented toward inner reality.
4) Who claimed that personality can best be understood by assessing people
on two dimensions: Extroversion and Neuroticism ?
a) Allport b) Cattell
c) Eyesenck d) Jung.
5) According to arousal theory of Eysenck, which one is regarded as the
seat of neuroticism ?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2.3.4 Guilford’s Trait Theory
J.P . Guilford is another important psychologist who have tried to analyse and
predict about personality on the basis of traits. The importance of trait for
Guildford’s view about personality can be understood from his definition of
personality which states that an individual personality is nothing but the
individual’s unique pattern of traits. Trait, for him, is any distinguishable, relatively
enduring way in which one person differs from another.
Using factor analysis, Guilford came to the conclusion that there are seven
modalities of traits, that is (i) morphological, (ii) physiological, (iii) needs, (iv)
interest, (v) attitudes (vi) aptitudes and (vii) temperament. The first two are the
somatic traits whereas the last five are behavioural aspects of personality.
Guilford has emphasised that these modalities should not be regarded as seven
separate constituent parts of personality but personality must be seen as integrated
whole and these seven modalities can be seven different directions from which
the whole can be viewed. In other words, personality is not the sum total of
seven traits but rather a whole or single entity which can be looked at from at
least seven different angles. These seven traits are briefly discussed below.


===== PAGE 28 =====
32
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2.3.4.1 Physiological and Morphological Traits
Physiological traits and morphological traits together are called somatic traits.
Physiological traits refer to physical functions such as heart rate, breathing rate,
hormone level, blood sugar and so forth. Morphological traits, on the other hand,
refer to physical attributes such as physique, head size, length of hand and leg,
size of ear, curvature of spine, etc. Guilford (1959) reported very little substantial
relationship between these two types of traits, that is, morphological traits and
physiological traits although Sheldon (1942) earlier had reported a high correlation
between physique and temperament.
2.3.4.2 Needs, Interests and Attitudes
Needs, interests and attitudes are regarded as hormetic (adaptive responses)
dimensions of personality by Guilford. These hormetic traits, therefore, instigate
action because they are more or less directly related to motivation.
Needs are said to be relatively permanent dispositions that motivate the person
towards certain condition. For example, prestige is one need and it instigates
action towards getting social prestige. Likewise to get food is a need, which
motivates a hungry person toward securing a full stomach.
Interests are person’s generalised behaviour tendency to be attracted by some
stimuli. Thus, for Guilford, interest are general rather than specific traits and
valued positively rather than negatively. Besides, interest also refers to liking to
perform some activities. All such interests contribute to causation of behaviour.
Attitudes also instigate behaviour and they are defined as a disposition to favour
or not to favour a social object or social action. Since attitudes involve belief,
feelings and action, therefore, they are cognitive, affective and conative, too.
One’s view about premarital sex, divorce and equal right to women can be the
example of attitudes. Having a particular attitude forces the person to think, feel
and act accordingly.
2.3.4.3 Aptitudes
Aptitudes refer to how well an individual can perform a given activity and they
represent a dimension of ability though they are more specific than abilities. It
means that all aptitudes are abilities but not all abilities are aptitude. For example,
a tall person may have the ability to reach at the highest shelf but this could not
be considered his aptitude. On the basis of factor analysis, Guildford (1959)
identified three primary aptitudes, viz., (i) Perceptual aptitudes, (ii) Psychomotor
aptitudes and (iii) intelligence.
Perceptual aptitudes relate to the various sense modalities and include factors
like visual, auditory and kinesthetic sensitivity.
Psychomotor aptitudes are abilities shown by physical educators, dance instructors
and athletic coaches. Human engineers also need psychomotor aptitudes because
they have to design machine in such a way that they must be operated conveniently.
Intelligence is a general aptitude. Guilford developed his famous Structure-of-
intellect model based upon three primary parameters of operations, products and
contents. Originally, there were five categories of operation and six categories of


===== PAGE 29 =====
33
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
product and four categories of content in this model. The result was 5 × 6 × 4
=120 factors or components of intelligence. Shortly before his death, Guilford
(1988), however, expanded the total number from 120 to 180 abilities or factors
when he raised the categories of operation from five to six by dividing one of the
component of operation, that is, memory into two : Memory recording and
Memory relation. The total number of categories of contents was also changed
from four to five. Thus now the total factors constituting intelligence became
6 × 6 × 5 = 180.
2.3.4.4 Temperament
According to Guilford (1959) temperament refers to the manner in which the
individual performs a behaviour. Whether a person is impulsive, tolerant,
deliberate or critical in his or her behaviour, is all indicative of the person’s
temperament. Temperament has been assessed by varieties of inventories in which
Guilford-Zimmerman Temperament Survey (GZTS) became very popular.
GZTS assesses 10 bipolar traits of temperament : General activity vs. Inactivity
(G), Restraint vs. Impulsiveness (R), Ascendance vs. submissiveness (A),
Sociability vs. Shyness (S), Emotional stability vs. Depression (E) Objectivity
vs. Subjectivity (O), Friendliness vs. Hostility (F), Thoughtfulness vs.
Unreflectiveness (T), Personal relations vs. Criticalness (P) and Masculinity vs.
Feminity (M).
Guilford has pointed out that there are three levels of trait generality : hexic
level, primary trait level and type level. Hextic trait is displayed by the person
only in specific situations. For example, Mohan who is generally shy and reserved
person, may show dominance and aggression before his friends for wining the
competition. Here dominance and aggression are examples of hexic level trait
and determine his specific actions.
Primary traits are manifested in broader range of behaviour than are hexic traits.
For example, when Shyam shows dominance and aggression most of the time in
his behaviour, it means these two are his primary traits. Guilford further has
opined that primary traits are determined to some extent by types. When a person’s
behaviours generally revolve around any single disposition, he is said to be
manifesting a type upon which Guilford did not give as much emphasis as it had
been done by Eysenck. Thus types are composed of primary traits which have
positive intercorrelations. An extravert type, for example, may be recognised
through observation of high correlations among the primary traits of sociability,
orientation towards external reality, impulsiveness, love for contacting other
people, tolerance for pain, etc.
Self Assessment Questions 4
1) Which of the followings is Not a hormetic trait ?
a) Interest b) Need
c) Attitude d) Aptitude
2) Physicque is an example of:
a) Hormetic trait b) Physiological trait
c) Morphological d) None.


===== PAGE 30 =====
34
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 3) How many abilities have been identified by Structrue-of-intellect model?
a) 120 b) 160
c) 180 d) 140
4) Physical functions like heart rate, breathing rate, brain wave patterns
are all covered by :
a) Morphological traits b) Physicologial traits
c) Hormetic traits d) Behavioural traits.
5) Which of the followings is not assessed by GZTS?
a) Masculinity – feminity b) Friendliness – hostility
c) Practical – imaginative d) Sociability – shyness.
2.3.5 Five Factor Model
Today, the most talked about trait approach to personality is the Five Factor
Model (FFM) also known as the Big Five. As its name implies, according to this
model there are five broad personality factors, each of which is composed of
constellation of traits. Based on his own researches as well as researches of others
in 1981, Goldberg pointed out that it is possible to prepare a model for structuring
individual differences among traits of personality. Big Five was meant to refer to
the finding that each factor subsumes a large number of specific traits. In fact,
the Big Five are almost as broad and abstract as Eysenck’s superfactors. Those
Big Five dimensions of personality using the names assigned by MC Crae and
Costa (1987) are as under :
2.3.5.1 Extraversion (E)
This factor assesses the quality and intensity of interpersonal interaction. High
scorer in this factor is characterised by being sociable, active, talkative, person-
oriented, optimistic, fun-loving and affectionate, whereas low scorer is
characterised by being reserved, sober, aloof, task oriented, retiring and quiet.
Thus this factor contrasts extraverted traits with introverted traits.
2.3.5.2 Neuroticism (N)
This factor assesses adjustment vs. emotional instability. Persons high on
neuroticism are prone to emotional instability. Such persons tend to experience
negative emotion and are characterised by being moody, irritable, nervous,
insecure, and hypochondriacal. Low scorers on this dimension are characterised
by being calm, relaxed, unemotional, hardy, self-satisfied etc. Thus this factor
differentiates people who are emotionally stable from those who are emotionally
unstable.
2.3.5.3 Consientiousness (C)
This factor mainly assesses the person’s degree of organisation, persistence and
motivation in goal directed behaviour. In other words, this factor describes task
and goal directed behaviours and the socially required impulse control behaviour.
This factor easily differentiates individuals who are dependable, organised, hard
working, responsible, reliable and thorough (high scorers) from those who are
undependable, disorganised, unreliable, impulsive, irresponsible, lazy and
negligent (low scorers).


===== PAGE 31 =====
35
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
2.3.5.4 Agreeableness (A)
This factor assesses the person’s quality of interpersonal orientation ranging from
compassion to antogonism in thinking, feeling and action. High scorer on this
factor would be characterised by soft-hearted, good-natured, trusting, helpful,
straightforward and forgiving whereas the low scorer would be characterised by
cynical, suspicious, uncooperative, vengeful, irritable and manipulative.
2.3.5.5 Openness (O)
This factor assesses proactive seeking and appreciation of experience for its own
sake as well as tolerance for and exploration for the something new and unfamiliar.
High scorers would be characterised by being good-natured, warm, sympathetic
and cooperative whereas low scorers would be characterised by being unfriendly,
aggressive, unpleasant, argumentative, cold and even hostile.
First letters of the Big Five dimensions can be reordered to spell out the word
OCEAN—an easy way to keep them in memory.
For assessing these Big Five dimensions, Goldberg (1992) has developed a
questionnaire named Transparent Bipolar Inventory. Still another much more
popular questionnaire to assess Big Five has been developed by Costa and McCrae
(1992). This questionnaire has been named as the NEO-Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R). Originally, this inventory assessed only N, E and O but later on the
other two factors such as A and C were also included. In this new inventory each
dimension or factor is defined by six facets and each facet is measured by 8
items. Therefore, the latest version of NEO-PI-R consists of a total of 240 items
(5 factos × 6 facets × 8 items). On the basis of several studies, McCrae and Costa
(1990) are convinced that these five factors as measured by NEO-PI-R are
sufficient for describing the basic dimensions of personality. In fact, they go
beyond this to say that, “no other system is as complete and yet so parsimonious”.
In making a fair evaluation to trait approach, it can be said that longitudinal
studies support trait approach. McCrae and Costa (1990) have studied personality
traits of persons over time and have found them to be stable for a periods of 3 to
30 years. They have opined that stable individual differences in basic dimensions
are universal feature of adult personality. Despite this, critics are of view that
trait approach, like type approach, don’t explain the causes or development of
personality. It simply identify and describe characteristics, which are correlated
with behaviour. Moreover, critics of trait perspective further say that the
consistency of our behaviour across situations is very low and therefore, not
predictable on the basis of personality traits. Initially, one of the severest critics
of trait approach was Walter Mischel (1968) who claimed that the situation, and
not our traits, determines the behaviour.
Thus his stand initiated person situation debate, that is, question of relative
importance of person and situation in determining the behaviour of the persons.
Now Mischel has modified his original position and has proclaimed that behaviour
is shaped by both the person (traits) and the situation. Other psychologists have
also provided support for the view that there are some internal traits which strongly
influence behaviour across different situations (Carson, 1989; McAdams, 1992).


===== PAGE 32 =====
36
Personality: Theories and
Assessment Self Assessment Questions 5
1) Which of the followings is not assessed by Five factor model ?
a) Neuroticism b) Psychoticism
c) Agreeableness d) Conscientiousness.
2) The latest version of NEO-PI-R measures the dimensions of personality
through :
a) Six facets b) Five facets
c) Seven facets d) Four facets.
3) Who developed Transparent Bipolar Inventory ?
a) McCrae and Costa b) Goldbeng
c) Eysenck d) None of these.
4) Who has been considered as the most severest critics of trait appraoch?
a) Campbell b) Hawley
c) Mischel d) None of these.
5) High scorers on Agreableness dimension of Big Five model would be
characterised by being :
a) good-natured, trusting and soft-hearted
b) organised, reliable and hard-working
c) curious, creative and untraditional
d) active, talkative and fun-loving
2.4 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we learnt that the earliest effort to explain human behaviour involved
the use of personality typologies, which classified behaviour into discrete, all-
or-nothing categories. The first was the four-humor theory and remained popular
for centuries although today it is regarded as a baseless theory because it has
been established now that personality and moods are not driven by bodily fluids.
This was followed by Sheldon’s somatotype (body build) based theory of
personality. Sheldon assigned each individual to one of the three categories ,
viz., (i) ectomorphic (thin, long and fragile), (ii) endomorphic (fat, soft and round)
and (iii) mesomorphic (muscular, strong and rectangular). According to Sheldon,
ectomorphs are artistic, brainy and introverted, endomorphs are relaxed, fond of
eating, sleeping and sociable whereas mesomorphs are affective, dominant, filled
with energy and courage.
MBTI (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator) typology is another typology which is
modern one and based upon Carl Jung’s theory of personality types. The four
dimensions of personality that are assessed here are : E or I (Extraversion-
Introversion), S or N (Sensing or Intution), T or F (Thinking-Feeling) and J or P
(Judgment-Perception). The MBTI identifies 16 types of personality based on
Jung’s distinctions between E-I, S-N and T-F, as well as upon Isobel Myer’s
distinction between J-P .


===== PAGE 33 =====
37
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
Since the type theories robbed the uniqueness of persons by placing the persons
into a perconceived category, the trait theories came about. Trait approaches
explain personality in terms of traits, which are defined as relatively stable and
consistent personal characteristics. Trait approach attempts to explain personality
and differences between people in terms of their personal characteristics, to devise
ways of measuring individual differences in personality traits and to use these
measures for understanding and predicting a person’s behaviour.  Under the trait
approach, we considered the viewpoints of Allport, Cattell, Eysenck, Guilford,
and the Five Factor Model would be discussed in detail.
For Allport, traits are the building blocks of personality as well as the source of
individuality. For Allport, trait is something that exits but remains invisible. It is
located somewhere in the nervous system (Ryckman, 1993).  Allport recognised
two major categories of traits  Common traits and Individual traits.  He classified
individual traits further into three types, viz. cardinal tratis,  central trait and
secondary trait.
All these traits are dynamic in the sense that they possess motivational power.
Those individual traits or dispositions which are intensely experienced are said
to be more motivational. Those individual traits which are less intensively
experienced though possessing more motivational power are said to be more
stylistic.
According to Allport, all these individual traits form structure of personality
which, in turn, determines the behaviour of an individual. In his view only by
focussing upon the uniqueness of the individual, a scientific and substantial
understanding of personality is possible.
We then learnt about Cattel’s Trait theory. Raymond Cattell (1950) considered
personality to be a pattern of traits providing the key to understanding it and
predicting a person’s behaviour. According to him, traits are relatively permanent
and broad reaction tendencies of personality. They serve as the building blocks
of personality. He distinguished between (i) surface trait and source trait, (ii)
constitutional and environmental-mold traits (iii) ability, temperament and
dynamic traits.
Cattell found 23 source traits in normal persons and 16 of which he studied in
detail. These 16 basic source traits were then used in the construction of the
Sixteen Personality (16PF) Questionnaire popularly knows as “16 PF test”. In
addition to these 16 factors measured by personality test, Cattell, on the basis of
his subsequent researches proposed seven new factors. Using factor analysis to
the surface traits of the normal and abnormal personality spheres, Cattell derived
12 new factors that measure psychopathological traits. Cattell also distinguished
between constitutional traits and environmental mold traits. Cattell has further
subdivided traits into ability traits, temperament traits and dynamic traits.
Dynamic traits are the person’s motivation and interest which set the person in
action toward the goal. The important dynamic traits in Cattell’s system are of
three types, viz. (i) attitudes, (ii) ergs and (iii) sentiments.
We then learnt about Eysenck’s Type Trait Hierarchy theory. British Psychologist
Hans Eysenck (1990) had a strong belief that personality is largely determined
by genes and that the environmental factors have very little role to play in it. He


===== PAGE 34 =====
38
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
opined that personality is more or less stable and enduring organisation of a
person’s character, temperament, intellect and physique. In this definition, he
has emphasised upon traits (stable and enduring characteristics) which when
clustered together, constitutes a type.
Eysenek’s viewpoint is personality is hierarchically organised, consisting of types,
traits and habits. At the lowest level of Eysenck’s hierarchy are the single responses
like action or thoughts. Regularly occurring responses form habits and related
habits form traits and several traits clustered together constitute a type or also
known as super factors.  Later, on the basis of other statistical analysis, he
postulated a third dimension, viz., Psychoticism/Impulse control. These three
dimensions, according to Eysenck, are the major individual difference types
considered most useful in describing personality functioning. To measure these
three dimensions of personality, Eysenck developed a paper and pencil test. The
latest version of the test has been named as Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
(EPQ).
Recently, inhibition theory has been replaced by arousal theory by Eysenck
because inhibition and excitation although were very useful concepts, were found
to be extremely difficult to assess. According to arousal theory, differences in
the behaviour of introverts and extraverts are due to the various parts of Ascending
Rreticular Activating System (ARAS) in the nervous system.
Eysenck’s theory was followed by learning about Guilford’s trait theory. Guilford
defined personality as the individual’s unique pattern of traits. Trait, for him, is
any distinguishable, relatively enduring way in which one person differs from
another. Using factor analysis, Guilford came to the conclusion that there are
seven modalities of traits, that is (i) morphological, (ii) physiological, (iii) needs,
(iv) interest, (v) attitudes (vi) aptitudes and (vii) temperament. The first two are
the somatic traits whereas the last five are behavioural aspects of personality.
Guilford emphasised that these modalities should not be regarded as seven
separate constituent parts of personality but personality must be seen as integrated
whole and these seven modalities can be seven different directions from which
the whole can be viewed. Guilford also pointed out three levels of trait generality:
hexic level, primary trait level and type level.
Today, the most talked about trait approach to personality is the Five Factor
Model (FFM) also known as the Big Five. As its name implies, according to this
model there are five broad personality factors, each of which is composed of
constellation of traits. Based on his own researches as well as researches of others
Goldberg pointed out that it is possible to prepare a model for structuring
individual differences among traits of personality. Big Five was meant to refer to
the finding that each factor subsumes a large number of specific traits. In fact,
the Big Five are almost as broad and abstract as Eysenck’s superfactors. Those
Big Five dimensions of personality using the names assigned by MC Crae and
Costa (1987) are Extraversion (E), Neuroticism (N), Consientiousness  (C),
Agreeableness (A), Openness (O)
First letters of the Big Five dimensions can be reordered to spell out the word
OCEAN—an easy way to keep them in memory.
For assessing these Big Five dimensions, Goldberg (1992) has developed a
questionnaire named Transparent Bipolar Inventory. Still another much more


===== PAGE 35 =====
39
State/Trait Approaches to
Personality
popular questionnaire to assess Big Five has been developed by Costa and McCrae
(1992) named as the NEO-Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R). Originally, this
inventory assessed only N, E and O but later on the other two factors such as A
and C were also included.
2.5 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Make distinction between individual traits and common traits. Following
Allport, discuss the different types of individual traits and their importance
in predicting human behaviour.
2) Explain viewpoints of Cattell regarding traits as being one of the determiners
of human behaviour.
3) Do you find Eysenck’s type-trait hierarchy a satisfactory explanation for
making prediction about human behaviour ?
4) Discuss the different trait modalities as outlined by J.P. Guilford for
understanding and predicting human behaviour.
5) Discuss the role of five-factor model in understanding human behaviour.
6) Do you find trait perspective a satisfcatory explanation for explaining
personality. Give reasons.
2.6 SUGGESTED READINGS
Zimbardo, P .G . & Weber, A.L. (1994). Psychology: Harper Collins
Baron, R.A. (2005). Pscyhology: Pearson Education
Santrock, J.W. (2006). Psychology: Essentials: Tata McGraw-Hill
Wade, G . & Tavris, C. Psychology: Pearson Education.
2.7 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT
QUESTIONS
1) 1. (d) 2. (b) 3. (b) 4. (c) 5. (b)
2) 1. (c) 2. (b) 3. (d) 4. (a) 5. (c)
3) 1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (d) 4. (c) 5. (c)
4) 1. (a) 2. (c) 3. (c) 4. (b) 5. (c)
5) 1. (b) 2. (a) 3. (b) 4. (c) 5. (a)


===== PAGE 36 =====
40
Personality: Theories and
Assessment UNIT 3 ASSESSMENT OF PERSONALITY
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Objectives
3.2 Needs and Aims of Assessment
3.3 Methods of Personality Assessment
3.3.1 Interviews
3.3.2 Projective Techniques
3.3.3 Classification of Projective Techniques
3.3.4 Association Technique
3.4 Ink Blot Technique
3.4.1 Construction Technique
3.4.2 Completion Technique
3.4.3 Expressive Techniques
3.4.4 The Rorschach Inkblot Technique
3.4.5 The Holtzman Inkblot Test
3.4.6 The TAT
3.4.7 The Sentence Completion Tests
3.4.8 Limitations of the Projective Tests
3.5 Behavioural Assessment
3.5.1 Limitations of Behavioural Assessment
3.6 Personality Inventories
3.6.1 The Mmpi – 2
3.6.2 Limitations of Personality Inventories
3.7 Let Us Sum Up
3.8 Unit End Questions
3.9 Glossary
3.10 Suggested Readings and References
3.0 INTRODUCTION
Personality assessment refers to the estimation of one’s personality make up,
that is the person’s characteristic behaviour patterns and salient and stable
characteristics. As there are different theoretical accounts of personality, and the
question is how do people find out what kind of personality they have? The
methods of estimating or measuring or assessing personality vary according to
the theory of personality used to develop those methods.
However, most of the psychological professionals doing personality assessment
do not necessarily tie themselves to one theoretical view point only, rather they
prefer to take an eclectic view of personality. The eclectic view is a way of
choosing the parts of different theories that seem to best fit a particular situation,
rather than using only me theory to explain a phenomenon.
In fact, looking at behaviour from different perspectives can often bring insights
into a person’s behaviour that would not easily come from taking only one


===== PAGE 37 =====
41
Assessment of Personalityperspective (Ciccarelli and Meyer, 2006). Therefore, many of the professional
doing personality assessment use different perspectives and also take on different
techniques for its assessment.
It is also important to note here that personality assessment may also differ with
respect to the purposes for which its is done. For example, if the purpose is self-
understanding, the person may select different tests/inventories, if the purpose is
to classify person’s as per their personality traits a different set of tests may be
useful. Finally, if the purpose is diagnostic (clinical psychologist, counselors
etc.) an entirely different set of tests may be more useful.
There are several tests/inventories which are available for the assessment of
personality. Broadly, these can be grasped into one of the three categories. These
are the subjective, objective and projective methods. The subjective approach
incorporates the assessment of one’s personality taking his/her work into account
e.g. what he or she had done throughout his/her life. It may also consider his/her
autobiographical accounts and biographies etc. But there is a major limitation of
it that there are possibilities that the person may exaggerate his/her strengths and
may minimise the account of his/her limitations and therefore we may be devoid
of the true picture of personality. In personality assessment the effort is to make
the assessment free from bias of any sort both from the subject/participant (whose
personality is to be assessed) and from that of the assessor. It presents that there
are so many such test/inventories whereby we can assess personality of a person
objectively and these are the important tools for the purpose. While some tests
assess the surface characteristics, others uncover the underlying aspects of
personality. Among the major procedures that are in use currently, the important
ones are those based on content relevance, empirical criterion keying, factor
analyses, and personality theory. Personality assessment may differ in the purposes
for which they are conducted. Personality assessment is used in the diagnosis of
personality disorders by clinical and counseling psychologists, psychiatrists; and
other psychological professionals.
3.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Define personality assessment;
• Explain the prominent features of personality assessment;
• Explain the aims of personality assessment;
• Explain the various methods used in the assessment of personality;
• Differentiate between different types of tools of personality assessment;
• Explain projective techniques in detail; and
• Explain objective techniques in detail.
3.2 NEEDS AND AIMS OF ASSESSMENT
Testing is becoming more and more important with each growing area of
psychology. Traditionally, tests were employed only to measure individual
differences or intraindividual reactions under different circumstances. The nature
and extent of individual differences, their possessed psychological traits,


===== PAGE 38 =====
42
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
differences among various groups etc. are becoming some of the major
components demanding assessment as an aid of measurement.
Personality testing is an essential pre-requisite for identifying the various
constituents of personality. Testing in personality provides measures of emotional
and motivational traits of personality.
3.3 METHODS OF PERSONALITY ASSESSMENT
Some of the important tests and techniques measuring personality include (i)
Interviews (ii) Projective techniques (iii) Association techniques  (iv) Expressive
techniques
3.3.1 Interviews
Interview is a method of personality assessment in which the interviewee has to
answer the questions asked by the professional, in a structured or unstructured
fashion. Some therapists note down the answers of the interviewee in a survey
process. This type of interview is unstructured in manner and moves naturally.
Limitations of Interviews
Interview by the psychologist demands the report of innermost feeling, concerns
and urges on the part of client. This is something that can be known directly by
the client/interviewee and thus, the problems encountered with self report data
like survey are faced with interviewing also. Interviewees/Clients can misinform,
lie, distort the actual facts or reality and hide the true information for social
desirability. Also, biases can occur on the part of the interviewers as their personal
belief system or prejudices may put obstacles in the interpretation of the
information given by the interviewee.
Halo effect is the other problem with interviews. Halo effect is a tendency to
form a favorable or unfavorable impression of someone at the fist meeting and
after that first impression all of the comments and behaviour of that person are
interpreted in agreement with the impression. Those who make a good first
impression due to clothing, physical appearance or some other characteristic
seem to have a “halo” for everything they do in a positive light.
3.3.2 Projective Techniques
These techniques are assumed to reveal those central aspects of personality that
lie in the unconscious mind of an individual. Unconscious motivations, hidden
desires, inner fears and complexes are presumed to be elicited by their unstructured
nature that affect the client’s conscious behaviour. The assignment of a relatively
unstructured task is a major distinguishing feature of projective techniques.
An unstructured task is one that permits an endless range of possible responses.
The underlying hypothesis of projective techniques is that the way the test material
or “structures” are perceived and interpreted by the individual, reflects the
fundamental aspects of her or his psychological functioning. In other words, the
test material serves as a sort of screen on which respondents “project” their
characteristic thought processes, anxieties, conflicts and needs .


===== PAGE 39 =====
43
Assessment of PersonalityClients are shown ambiguous visual stimuli by the psychologist and are asked to
tell what they see in that stimuli. It is presumed that the client will project the
unconscious concerns and fears onto the visual stimulus and thus the psychologist
can interpret the responses and understand the psychodynamic underlying the
problem of the client. Tests that utilise this method are called projective tests.
These tests, besides their function of exploring one’s personality, also serve as a
diagnostic tool to uncover the hidden personality issues.
The history of projective techniques began in the beginning of the 15
th century
when Leonardo da Vinci selected pupils on the basis of their attempt to find
shapes and patterns in ambiguous form (Piotrowski, 1972). In 1879, a Word
association test was constructed by Gallon. Similar tests were used in clinical
settings by Carl Jung. Later, Frank (1939, 1948) introduced the term projective
method to describe a range of tests which could be used to study personality
with unstructured stimuli.
This way, the individual has enough opportunity to project his own personality
attributes which in the course of normal interview or conversation the person
would not reveal. More specifically, projective instruments also represent
disguised testing procedures in the sense that the test takers are not aware of the
psychological interpretation to be made of their responses.
Rather than measuring the traits separately the attention is focused on the
composite picture. Finally, projective techniques are an effective tool to reveal
the latent or hidden aspects of personality that remain embedded in the
unconscious until uncovered. These techniques are based on the assumption that
if the stimulus structure is weak in nature, it allows the individual to project his/
her feelings, desires and needs that are further interpreted by the experts.
Self Assessment Questions
1) What is the need for Personality Assessment?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2) How can personality assessment prove to be an aid in understanding
human behaviour?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................


===== PAGE 40 =====
44
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 3) What is the underlying approach behind personality testing?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4) What is projective technique?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3.3.3 Classification of Projective Techniques
Various types of projective techniques have been classified into several categories
by psychologists.
i) Constructive: It includes all those tests and situations where the construction
of some specific task is to be done by the examinee. The subject needs to
frame a structure upon the situation presented by the examiner, and be asked
to draw a human figure allowing the person to freely express the examiner’s
inclination.
ii) Constitutive: This category includes those tests which require the examinee
to constitute structures upon some given unstructured materials, as for
example, The Rorschach Ink Blot technique. In this test the examinee
imposes own structure upon the unstructured ink blots (Zubin, Eros and
Schumer, 1965) and the subject’s responses are scored and interpreted.
iii) Cathartic: It includes those situations where the examinee can release his
wishes, inner demands, conflicts etc. through some manipulative tasks.
iv) Interpretative: It includes those test situations where the examinee has to
add a detailed meaning to the given situation. For example, the Thematic
Apperception Test (TA T) and the Word Association Test.
v) Refractive: This category includes all those techniques through which the
examinee gets the opportunity to depict his personality in the form of
drawing, painting etc. Frank cited that graphology is the best example of
this category.
If we evaluate Frank’s classification, it is obvious that it consists of several
limitations. The biggest one is that according to his classification, same test can
be included in two or more categories, causing considerable overlap. This way,
Frank’s classification is not a popular classification of projective methods.


===== PAGE 41 =====
45
Assessment of Personality3.3.4 Association Techniques
This category includes all those situations where responses are to be given by
the examinee in the form of associations which he makes after seeing or listening
to the stimulus material . E.g. The Word Association Test etc. In the Word-
Association test, the examinee is provided with a number of words in the form
of a list and he is required to utter the very first word that comes to his mind on
listening the stimulus word. The responses in accordance with the reaction time
are used for the analysis of personality of the individual.
3.4 INK BLOT TECHNIQUES
The Ink blot techniques consist of two popular techniques, that is, The Rorschach
Test and The Holtzman Ink blot test. In these tests the examinee has to respond
to an unstructured situation composed of some ink blots.
3.4.1 Construction Techniques
All those situations are included here in which a story is constructed by the
examinee on seeing the stimulus material within some given time limit. The
themes and mode of responding are considered relevant in such tests. The
Thematic Apperception Test (TA T), the Object Relations Test are some of the
examples of construction techniques. Some other tests like Draw-A-Person test
are also included in this category. In all these tests, the examinee constructs or
produces simple/complex statements in a story form or draws some picture or
person.
3.4.2 Completion Techniques
These include the situations where some incomplete sentences are presented to
the examinee and he can complete them in the form he desires. For example
I want ………..,
I feel excited about…………………..
The subject has to fill up the blanks and the responses given by the examinee are
recorded and analysed to get a picture of the individual’s personality. For example,
Rotter’s Incomplete Sentences Blank. Some people consider it as a semi projective
technique.
3.4.3 Expressive Techniques
These include those tests where some manipulative tasks are used by the examinee
to depict his or her personality. Some interaction with the given material is the
theme of these techniques. Some of the common expressive techniques include
role playing, finger painting, play, drawing etc. The characteristic feature of
expressive techniques is that the examiner pays much attention to the manner in
which the given materials are manipulated by the examinee.
3.4.4 The Rorschach Inkblot Test
Rorschach inkblot test was developed in 1921 by Swiss psychiatrist Hermann
Rorschach. It consists of 10 inkblots, five in black ink on a white background
and five in colored inks on a white background. The Rorschach test is a measure
of both the intellectual and non intellectual personality traits. While developing


===== PAGE 42 =====
46
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
this technique, Rorschach experimented with a large number of ink blots which
were administered to different psychiatric groups. On the basis of such clinical
observations various psychiatric syndromes that differentiate response
characteristics were taken up in the scoring system.
In the test , the subjects are asked to simply state whatever each inkblot looks
like to them. Responses are scored by the psychologists using predetermined
categories, on key factors such as color and shape, movement, whether the whole
or part blot has been seen, and whether the response is given in content to the
whole or to peculiar details in the blot.
These blots are frequently used for personality description, diagnosis of mental
disorders and for behaviour predictions (Watkins et al, 1995; Wiener, 1997).
The whole procedure of The Rorschach Test is a combined set of three
components, viz., performance proper, inquiry, and scoring.  Let us deal with
each of these one by one.
Administration of Rorschach test
The administration of the Rorschach test can be put be up in two stages as given
below.
a) Performance proper
The examinee is asked to get seated and rapport is established with him. First
plate is then handled to the client with the question “What do you think this
could be?” During the process the examinee needs to be careful about the
following things:
1) Reaction time which means the time gap between the card presentation and
examinee’s response. Exclamations and comments are excluded from
scoring.
2) The position of the card is also taken account of while examinee is responding
and are scored as v, ^, <, >.depending on the direction in which the card is
turned.
3) The responses are recorded verbatim for the reason that the examiner can
read it and analyse the same effectively.
4) The total time for which the card is kept by the subject is also recorded. The
time lapsed between the presentation of the card and the first response the
subject gives is called the reaction time.
On completion of the first plate, the second plate is given to the examinee and
similarly all the 10 plates are presented in a sequential manner. The total number
of responses is also termed as response productivity ratio and is coded as R. On
a Rorschach protocol, for most adults the score varies from 15 to 30. V ague and
uncertain response by the examinee is noted down to be clarified in the second
stage of administration, that is, the inquiry stage.
Inquiry
It is the second stage of administration of the Rorschach test. It is taken up after
obtaining responses on all the ten cards during “performance proper”. The basic
purpose of conducting inquiry is to collect all the necessary information for the
accurate scoring of the responses. Here, a location sheet is presented before the


===== PAGE 43 =====
47
Assessment of Personalityexaminee and he is asked to locate the part on the basis of which he has responded,
so as to maintain a permanent record of the area of the blot used by the subject in
responding. The questions framed for the inquiry stage are based on the examiner’s
skill and expertise.
Scoring of Rorschach test
The major differences among the various scoring systems of the Rorschach test
flourished in 1930s to the 1960s. There is also the focus of concern for Rorschach
interpretation based either on the content of the responses or on their formal
characteristics, such as location, determinants, form quality, and the various
quantitative summaries derived from the responses, that is, the content.
Scoring of location is important.  Location  refers to that part of the plot with
which each response of the subject is associated. For example, whether the whole
blot or a common detail or a usual detail has been used by the respondent and are
scored as W, D ,d, Dd etc. The determinants of the response include form, color
shading and “movement” and are coded as F,C,S,M etc. The respondent’s
perception of the blot as a moving object is scored in context of “movement”.
The various types of movement include human movement, animal movement
etc.
The form quality of responses may depict the precision with which the response
match the location used, to their originality.
The treatment of content also varies from one Rorschach system to another except
some major regularly employed categories. Some of the main categories are
human figures, human details, animal details etc. and are coded as H, A , Hd, Ad
etc. Some other broad scoring categories may include art objects, plants, maps,
landscapes, clothing etc. For each of the 10 cards, certain specific responses are
scored as popular because of their common occurrence and thus, constitute the
popularity score.
Qualitative interpretations of the Rorschach scores include the association of
“whole” responses with conceptual thinking. The colour responses given by the
subject are indicative of the subject’s emotionality and fantasy life. The entire
response for all the 10 cards including the enquiry are integrated together to
interpret the psychodynamics underlying the problem and also decide upon the
diagnostic issues.
However, after a prolonged use of the Rorschach test as a psychometric
instrument, some of the researchers found a number of difficulties inherent in
the method itself, such as the variability in the total number of responses, examiner
effects and interdependence of scores etc. The five major Rorschach systems in
use developed in the United Sates show vast differences which were documented
by John E. Exner, Jr. (1969).  He, with his extensive investigations of clinical
use of the Rorschach Test came up with a single, distilled system encompassing
all the useful features being possessed by the method. Questions are also asked
about the reliability and validity of the assessment done through the Rorschach
Test.
In this context, it is pertinent to mention here that the Rorschach Ink blot test
was never developed as a psychometric tool, rather, it was developed as an
instrument to aid in the clinical diagnosis.


===== PAGE 44 =====
48
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
To briefly state about this test, it can be concluded that more research still needs
to be conduced to invent a standard method of administration and scoring of the
Rorschach. Test.
3.4.5 The Holtzman Inkblot Test
Holtzman et. Al. (1961) developed an inkblot test known as the Holtzman Inkblot
Test (HIT). This test was developed by Holtzman in order to remove the inherent
technical difficulties of the Rorschach like unlimited number of responses, poor
scorer reliability etc. There are two parallel forms (A and B) having 45 cards,
both colored and achromatic and markedly asymmetric. One response per card
is taken by the respondent. Each response is followed by a two fold simple
question : where was the percept represented in the blot and what the percept
suggests about the blot ? All the responses are then classified under 22 response
variables.
It has been found by many researchers that Holtzman test appears to be better
standardised than the Rorschach test. Also the scorer reliability of the HIT is
highly satisfactory validity data on HIT have also yielded satisfactory results. It
has also overcome the problem of productivity ratio by specifying the number of
responses.
Recently, Holtzman (1988) has also developed a variant of HIT called HIT 25.
Consisting of 25 cards. It has been found to be successful in diagnosing
schizophrenia.
3.4.6 The TAT
This test was developed by Henry Murray and his colleagues (Morgan and Murray,
1935). The Thematic Apperception Test (TA T) consists of 20 pictures which are
all black and white. The people depicted in the picture are deliberately drawn in
ambiguous situations. After showing the picture, a story is to be told by the
client about the person or people in the picture. They have to say what is happening
in the picture, what has caused the event and what could have taken place in the
past and what would happen in the future. The story narrated by the client is
interpreted by the psychologist, who tries to look for revealing statements and
projection of the client’s hidden emotions onto the characters in the pictures. In
the original interpretation method of TAT scores, the examiner first determines
who is the “hero”, the character of either sex with whom the respondent
presumably identifies himself or herself. The content of the stories is then analysed
in reference to Murray’s list of “needs” and “press”. Achievement, affiliation
and aggression are the examples of needs whereas “press” refers to environmental
forces that may facilitate or interfere with need satisfaction.
However, TAT has been used extensively in the research of personality but the
high variations in administration and scoring procedures associated with TA T
has made it quite difficult to investigate the psychometric properties of the TAT.
Nevertheless, the value of Thematic Apperception Techniques has been confirmed
and also the clinical utility of various versions of the TAT both for traditional
and specific applications have been established.
3.4.7 The Sentence Completion Tests
Other than these two well-known projective tests, there are some other types of
projective tests which include Sentence Completion test, Draw-A-Person test,


===== PAGE 45 =====
49
Assessment of Personalityand House-Tree-Person Test. In the sentence completion test, verbal material is
used. Various incomplete sentences are given to the subject to complete them.
Some of the incomplete sentences are like example given below:
I feel very …….,
I wish my mother….
The subject is asked to complete the sentence the way he/she desires. In the
Draw-A-Person and House-Tree-Person, the client is supposed to draw the named
items on a white sheet.
3.4.8 Limitations of the Projective Tests
Projective tests are basically subjective in nature and the interpretation of the
answers of clients needs deep analytic and artistic traits. Reliability and validity
related problems always exist in projective tests. There are no standard grading
scales for projective tests. Person’s varying mood may decide the person’s answer
which may vary considerably from one day to another.
Some situational variables like the examiner’s physical characteristics are likely
to influence the responses on projective techniques. It has also been seen that the
changed instructions on the part of examiner also influence the examinee’s scores
on projective techniques to a great extent.
Finally, in the words of Eysenck (1959), projective techniques can be summarised
as those in which the relationship between projective indicators and personality
traits have not been demonstrated by any empirical evidences.
A number of evidences show that most studies of projective techniques are guided
by methodological flaws and are ill designed.
Projective techniques are not guided by any consistent, meaningful and testable
theories.
There is no evidence showing a relationship between global interpretation of
projective techniques by experts and psychiatrists.
Generally, projective techniques have poor predictive ability regarding failure or
success in various walks of life.
Self  Assessment Questions
1) Define Projective techniques as a tool of assessment.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................


===== PAGE 46 =====
50
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 2) Explain various projective techniques in detail.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3) Discuss the classification of projective techniques according to various
researchers.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4) Critically evaluate various personality testing procedures.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3.5 BEHAVIOURAL ASSESSMENT
Behaviorists assume that personality is a composite set of learned responses to
stimuli in the environment, they undertake to watch such behaviour as a preferred
method to study.
One of the methods is direct observation, that requires the psychologist to observe
the client while engaged in ordinary, daily-routine behaviour, at home, school,
workplace or any other natural setting.
Among other methods often used by behavioural therapists are rating scales and
frequency counts. In a rating scale, either the psychologist or the client assigns a
numeric rating or some specific behaviour. On the other hand, in a frequency
count, the frequency of certain behaviours in a specified time limit is counted.
Both rating scales and frequency counts are being used by educators in the
diagnosis of various behavioural problems like attention deficit disorder etc.
3.5.1 Limitations of Behavioural Assessment
Observer bias is the major limitation of behavioural assessments.
In observational method, there is no control over the external environment and
this may lead to interpret the events in fruitless direction.


===== PAGE 47 =====
51
Assessment of Personality
3.6 PERSONALITY INVENTORIES
Personality inventory is a printed form that consists of a set of statements or
questions applying to human behaviour. The list of questions is a standard one
and requires specific answers such as “yes”, “no” and “cannot decide”. As the
questions demand close-ended answers, these assessments are quite objective in
nature.
Cattell’s 16PF is one such personality inventory. NEO-PI by Costa and McCrae
(2000) has been revised, which is based on the five factor model of personality
traits. Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is another commonly used inventory.
Introversion, Extraversion (I/E) is a classic dimension that began with Jung and
is represented in nearly every personality theory, including the Big Five. The
sensing / intuition (S/I), thinking / feeling T/P), Introversion / Extroversion (I/E)
and Perceiving/Judging (P/J) are the four dimensions that can differ for each
individual resulting in ISTJ, ISTP , ISFP , ISFJ personality types possibly (Briggs
and Myers, 1998). For example, an ESTJ is an organiser, practical in nature and
energetic in activity, an ESTJ is also a good school administrator.
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1993), the California
Psychological Inventory (Gough, 1995) and the Sixteen Personality Factor
Questionnaire (Cattell, 1994) are some other common personality tests.
3.6.1 The MMPI-2
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, V ersion-II or MMPI-2 is the most
common personality inventory. It tests specifically, the abnormality inventory. It
tests specifically, the abnormal behaviour patterns in personality MMPI-2 consists
of 567 statements such as “I believe I am being plotted against”. The answers to
the statements must be in “true”, “false”, or “cannot say”. It has 10 clinical scales
and eight validity scales besides various subscales. Each scale tests a particular
kind of behaviour. Ranging from mild to more serious disorders such as
schizophrenia and depression, are assessed using this inventory.
Validity scales ascertain that whether the person taking the inventory is responding
honestly or not. For example, if one of the statements is “I am contended with
whatever I have” and a person responds “true” to that statement, gets into suspicion
that the person is lying. If several of validity scale questions are answered in this
manner, it clearly depicts that the person is not being honest.
3.6.2 Limitations of Personality Inventories
Personality inventories have certain advantages over projective tests and
interviews in the sense that inventories are standardised. Also, observer bias and
interpretation bias are not possible due to their objective frame. Inventories are
also superior to projective tests in terms of validity and reliability (Anastasi &
Orbina, 1997).
However, there are some problems with inventories too. Even though, good at
validity end, some people still fake their answers and respond in socially
acceptable ways. Also, some people follow a regular course of answering the
statements without actually considering them, there as others may pick statements
to answer at random rather than answering each and every statement.


===== PAGE 48 =====
52
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Though, the tasks of personality assessment and measurement is a skilled and
sophisticated one, today predictions of behaviour are based on measurement of
personality.
Self  Assessment Questions
1) Explain the meaning of personality inventories.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2) Discuss the nature of personality inventories.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3) Critically evaluate different personality inventories.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4) Critically evaluate behavioural assessment method.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3.7 LET US SUM UP
All types of personality tests available possess certain difficulties which are both
of theoretical and practical in nature. Every approach comes up with certain
advantages and disadvantages. However, personality measurement research has
gained enough importance. Still various devices are in the process of
improvement.


===== PAGE 49 =====
53
Assessment of PersonalitySome upcoming trends in personality testing include increasing evidence of
mutual influence between emotional and cognitive traits. Second, development
of a comprehensive model relating to human activity subsuming all sorts of
basic research on both emotional and cognitive traits.
3.8 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) What are the advantages and limitations of using interviews as a tool of
personality assessment?
2) How can projective tests be used to explore personality?
3) What are the problems encountered in using projective tests?
4) How can behavioural assessments be used in personality testing?
5) What are the different kinds of personality inventories used in personality
assessment?
5) How can further research in personality testing prove useful in enriching the
existing personality assessment procedures?
3.9 GLOSSARY
Method : Procedures of gathering information in
any field of study.
Interview : A method of personality assessment in
which the interviewer asks questions to
the clients and the client is allowed to
answer either in a structured or an
unstructured fashion.
Halo effect : Tendency of an interviewer to allow
positive characteristics of a client to
influence the assessments of client
behaviour and statements.
Projective tests : Assessment of personality that presents
ambiguous visual stimuli to the client and
ask the client to respond with whatever
comes to his mind.
Rorschach ink blot test : Projective test that uses 10 ink blots as
the ambiguous stimuli.
Thematic Apperception test : Projective test that uses 20 pictures of
persons in ambiguous situations as the
visual stimuli.
Personality Inventory : Paper and pencil tests that consist of
statements requiring a specific and
standardised response from the person
taking the test.


===== PAGE 50 =====
54
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 3.10 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Anastasi, A. (1997). Psychological Testing. New York: Macmillan.
Ciccarelli, S.K. and Meyers, G .E. ( 2006) Psychology. New Delhi : Pearson
Education.
References
Butcher, J.N.,& Rouse, S.V .(1996). Personality: Individual differences and clinical
assessment. Annual Review of Psychology, 47,87-111.
Camara,W.J.,Nathan,J.S.,& Puente,A.E. (2000). Psychological test usage:
Implications in professional psychology. Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 31(2), 141-154.
Exner, J.E.Jr.(1966). The Rorschach systems.New York: Grune & Statton.
Eysenck, H.J.,& Eysenck, S.B.G .(1993). Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
[Revised]. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Gough,H.G .(1995).California Psychological Inventory(3
rd ed.). Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologist –Press.
Holtzman, W.H., Thorpe, J.S. ,(1961). Inkblot perception and personality-
Holtzman Inkblot technique. Austin: University of Texas Press
Wiener, I.B. (1997).Current status of the Rorschach Inkblot Method. Journal of
Personality Assessment,68,5-19.


===== PAGE 51 =====
55
Assessment of Personality
UNIT 4 KEY ISSUES IN PERSONALITY
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Objectives
4.2 Genes and Personality
4.2.1 Nature vs. Nurture Debate
4.2.2 The Nature Theory – Heredity
4.2.3 The Nurture Theory – Environment
4.2.4 Twin Studies
4.2.5 Infant Shyness
4.2.6 Anti-social Personality Disorder
4.2.7 Family Studies
4.3 The Person-Situation Controversy
4.3.1 The Behavioural Consistency Controversy
4.4 Interactionist Approach to Situation versus Person Debate
4.5 Nomothetic Approach versus Idiographic Approach to Personality
4.5.1 Nomothetic Approach
4.5.2 Idiographic Approach
4.6 Cross Cultural Issue
4.7 Personality Traits and Five Factor Model
4.7.1 The Five Factor Model Across Cultures
4.8 Issues Relating to Theoretical Models
4.9 Let Us Sum Up
4.10 Unit End Questions
4.11 Glossary
4.12 Suggested Readings and References
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Besides the grand theories in personality, there is much more to be incorporated
in the study of personality. There are several issues in the study of personality
that have either remained unresolved or are still in the process of resolution.In
this unit you will learn about the impact of heredity on personality and the various
research studies that have been conducted to ascertain the relationship between
these two factors. The unit also gives a glimpse of the heredity versus environment
debate and points out the many research work in regard to this area and the
conclusions that have been arrived at based on the research. An attempt has also
been made in this unit to present the person versus situation controversy wherein
it has been pointed out as to how the consistency in behaviour across situations
is questioned. The interactionist approach in regard to this issue has been
elaborated. This unit also presents the idiographic versus nomothetic approach
to personality in which context the cross cultural issues have also been dealt
with. The research in the five factor model’s explanation of personality have
been listed and it has been pointed out as how this theory has been more popular
and the reasons for the same.


===== PAGE 52 =====
56
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 4.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Describe the various issues in personality;
• Explain the controversies in the study of personality;
• Analyse the various sub-issues still unanswered in the field of personality;
and
• List out the ways to fill up the lacunae existing in personality research.
Some of the major issues in personality research are being discussed in the
following sections:
4.2 GENES AND PERSONALITY
Nature versus nurture is probably the oldest issue in psychology. This is an age
old dispute among behavioural psychologists, philosophers, theologians, and
theorists of consciousness. “Nature versus nurture” is a term coined by the English
Victorian Polymath Francis Galton regarding the influence of heredity and
environment on the development of personality. .
4.2.1 Nature versus Nurture Debate
The nature versus nurture debate basically relates to the relative importance of
an individual’s inherent traits versus the personal experiences that lead to
individual differences in physical and behavioural traits.
Some scientists are of the view that genetic predispositions or even animal
instincts are the push factors behind people’s behaviour. Others believe that the
way one behaves is directly dependent upon the manner in which the person has
been taught to behave. The former is known as the “nature” theory of human
behaviour whereas the latter is termed as the “nurture” theory of human behaviour.
Sir Francis Galton was fascinated by the idea of genetic pre-programming and
tried to uncover the predestined ways of human beings. However, many of his
experiments proved ill-conceived but yet his contribution has been vital to the
study of personality issues. The technique of finger printing and the Word
Association Test are the end products of Galton’s contribution.
It has been stated that at the time of birth the child has no specific traits except
that it functions through its reflexes. As the child grows day by day, and in the
process of socialisation it learns many things in regard to the environemtn. It is
said that the child thus at birth is in a blank state of mind or ‘tabula rasa’, and
whatever one wants to put into it, the same would be absorbed and the child’s
behaviour accordingly will change. This view which holds that “nurture” yields
all or almost all the behavioural traits in the individual child.  Thus the
environment (nurture) plays a significant role in the development of the child’s
personality.
However, the fast growing understanding of the human genome has come up
with the information that both the sides are right in their own part. Whereas
nature provides us with inherent abilities and traits, nurture reshapes these genetic
tendencies and molds them with progressive learning and maturity. This view


===== PAGE 53 =====
57
Key Issues in Personalitypoint which agrees that both nature and nurture play crucial roles in human
personality development has come to be known as interactionism.
4.2.2 The Nature Theory – Heredity
It has been demonstrated by scientists that traits such as eye color and hair color
are decided by specific genes that are embedded and encoded in each human
cell. The things have been taken a step further by the nature theory that formulates
in more recent times it has also been shown that the more abstract traits such as
intelligence, personality, aggression and sexual orientation are also encoded in
an individual’s DNA. This has led to the concept of behavioural genes which
can justify criminal acts or criminal behaviours.
Another debated issue in context of nature theory is the occurrence of “gay gene”
that points to a genetic component to sexual orientation.
If there is no role of genetics, then fraternal twins brought up under the same
environmental conditions, would be alike, even though differences exist in their
genetic make up. But, according to the studies, they closely resemble each other
as compared to non-twin brothers and sisters.
4.2.3 The Nurture Theory – Environment
The proponents of the nurture theory are of the view that genetic tendencies
ultimately do not matter. They believe that our behavioural aspects originate
only from the environmental forces in our upbringing.
American psychologist John Watson, a strong proponent of environmental
learning, demonstrated that disorders like phobia could also be explained by
classical conditioning.
Today, known as the Father of Behavioral Science, B.F. Skinner proved that
human behaviour could be conditioned  in much the same way as animals.
Even if reared apart, identical twins should have been exactly the same in all
respects if environment had no role to play.
4.2.4 Twin Studies
Twin studies are an important tool in resolving the nature versus nurture argument.
Identical twins or Monozygotic twins, are siblings who have exact duplicates of
their genotypes. They best indicate that whether biological dispositions affect
traits and psychopathology in human beings.
Fraternal twins, disygotic twins share exactly half the number of genes with
each other. They are a very good basis for comparison of identical twins. Twin
studies usually rely on samples of identical and fraternal twins. Some of the
important studies on twins and related findings are presented below.
A study was conducted to determine the heritability of attitudes among twins, as
well as the genetic variables, such as intelligence, that can play a role in affecting
the attitudes among pairs of twins. The results of the study showed partial
correlation between the attitudes of the participants with their genetic factors.
Also, correlation existed between the attitudes related to self-reported perspectives
or to activities. For example, the subjects were asked to rate themselves on the


===== PAGE 54 =====
58
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
trait of sociability through a survey. The trait was correlated with 5 out of 6
attitudes factors that the subjects had towards sociability.
It was also found that non-shared environment experiences between pairs are
the strongest cause of attitude variances that overshadowed genetic predispositions
as well as shared environment experiences (Olson et al., 2001). Non-shared
environment refers to a condition in which something in the environment directly
affects one twin but no impact occurs on the other at all (V an denOord, 2000).
A Swedish study was conducted to measure personality traits of extraversion
and neuroticism among the twin pairs, impulsivity trait and family environment
and socio-economic status. The findings showed that the genotypes and the
environment interaction is an important concept in twin studies as it can also be
applied to the way people with the same genotypes might respond to similar
environment.
Our particular genotype environment, labeled Type I, indicates that the
environment plays a more significant role with a genotype for low scores on a
specific personality trait. It means that individuals with low genotypes for
extraversion would also score low on extraversion. Type-II genotype that is, the
environment interaction, on the other hand, is exactly the opposite of Type-I.
4.2.5 Infant Shyness
An adoption study was conducted to uncover the reasons behind why some infants
are open and responsive to attention, some take a bit longer to open up while
some others are withdrawn. It is difficult to tell whether babies are shy because
of the environment in which they are brought up as their mothers are shy or
because they inherit the shyness traits from their mothers.
Adoptive parents were given questionnaires that asked them to rate their infants
on the measure of shyness. The results revealed that in non-adoptive families,
the parents with high shyness rates also had shy infants. One significant conclusion
revealed that those biological mothers who rated high on shyness, had their
adopted babies as also shy. This shows some evidence of the effect of a genetic
link on family environment (Daniels & Plomin, 1985).
4.2.6 Anti-social Personality Disorder
Attempts have been made to see whether children who are at risk for antisocial
personality disorder develop symptoms in an adoptive family or gets protection
against the disorder in such environment. Results have revealed that anti-social
personality disorder is more prevalent in adopted children having biological risk
factors. Results further revealed that if both the biological parents and adoptive
parents come from criminal background, there is high incidence of an element
of criminal tendencies in the offspring.
For various reasons the interpretation of the results of adoption studies is very
difficult and valid conclusions cannot be made. Genetic factors are “simulated”
when the adoptive family environment is similar to the biological environment.
4.2.7 Family Studies
However, not as valid as twin and adoption studies, but still family studies play
an important role in resolving the heredity versus environment debate. These are


===== PAGE 55 =====
59
Key Issues in Personalitymainly used to identify the degree of risk of developing mental disorders by
relatives and other family members. Such studies are mainly used to determine
the risk of inheritance of mental disorders to offspring within families. These
types of studies are performed using molecular genetic studies where the DNA
from the participant’s blood samples is taken and the observed behaviour is
projected.
Self Assessment Questions
1) What role does heredity play in the shaping of one’s personality?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2) What role does environment play in the constitution of one’s personality?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3) Discuss the nature-nurture debate in the study of personality.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4) How do genes affect the psychopathology of behaviour?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
5) What does the genotype – environment interaction convey regarding
personality?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................


===== PAGE 56 =====
60
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 4.3 THE PERSON-SITUATION CONTROVERSY
The person situation debate was sparked off by a prominent book by Mischel in
1968, in which the trait approach to personality was targeted. According to
Mischel, the traits when rated, do not predict the actual behaviour. Opposed to
Mischel’s view, Epstein, in 1983, argued that although traits do not predict single
behaviour, they are good at predicting aggregates of such behaviours.
Broady and Ehrlichman (1998) devised the following hypothetical study to test
whether traits are good at predicting behaviour across not only in the same
situation, but also across different situations. For this, the following steps were
taken:
Step 1: Obtained measures of behaviour for a group of individuals in each of
twenty situations that were assumed to be relevant to the trait of conscientiousness.
Step 2: Assumed further that each individual has been observed several times in
a situation and that the measure of behaviour in a situation for each individual is
based on an aggregate index of behaviour.
Step 3: The set of situations was divided into two arbitrary groups of ten each.
Step 4: Obtained two aggregated indices of conscientiousness for each individual
by averaging the person’s score for each of the two groups of ten situations.
Step 5: Obtained a correlation between the two indices.
Step 6: Obtained an overall index of conscientiousness for each individual by
averaging the aggregated behavioural measures for each of the twenty situations
studied.
The findings showed that the person situation debate was an extended
disagreement, originally between social psychologists and personality
psychologists, on whether the “situation” or the personality traits are more
predictive of people’s behaviour.
Mischel argued that (1) literature review shows that personality traits only have
a correlation of about .30 with how people behave in a given situation, and (2)
the cross-situational consistency of behaviour is also just .20-.30. So, he concluded
that situations, rather than personality traits are better predictors of behaviour.
These arguments further generated a lot of response from personality
psychologists using trait questionnaires for several decades. Those on the side of
personality argued that the low personality-behaviour correlations do not prove
that situational variables are more valuable.
The actual relationship between personality and behaviour was found to be higher
than .40.
Personality is a stronger predictor of behaviour across all situations but not a
strong predictor of an individual’s behaviour at a specific time in a specific
situation.
Personality traits are the most useful psychological tools that predict behaviour
most strongly.


===== PAGE 57 =====
61
Key Issues in Personality4.3.1 The Behavioural Consistency Controversy
Departing from the trait approaches view that internal relatively stable forces of
personality exert a consistent effect on behaviour, another view proposes that no
consistent traits are reflected by an individual’s responses to any situation, rather
traits vary according to the situation.
Hartshorne and May (1928) conducted a classic study on honesty in children.
Children were exposed to situations where they could get a chance to behave
dishonestly and that too without getting detected. The results showed that the
children were not consistent on either of the ends (honestly or dishonesty), but
they behaved specific to the situation. It was proposed by Walter Mischel (1968,
1978) that people can learn to make quite different responses to similar stimuli
as per past reinforcements provided to them. So, before deciding a person’s
response to any specific stimuli, the perceptual and cognitive process should be
taken into account.
According to Mischel, the significance of situational variables or personality
variables should be determined while conducting research in personality. It is
basically determined by the strength and weakness of the situation. If everyone
makes the same interpretation and draws uniform expectancies to a situation
presented to them, then situational variables stand more important. On the other
hand, ambiguity in situations represents greater influence of personality variables
in behaviour.
Later on Mischel (1985) also proposed that people exhibit consistent modes of
responding, implying that consistency appears in situations where people behave
inadequately. Researchers like Magnusson and Endler (1977) also believe that
prediction of behaviour is done not only in terms of traits or situations alone,
rather some combination (interaction) of the two must be attended and referred
to. Various theories are now being developed that follow the interactionist
approach.
4.4 INTERACTIONIST APPROACH TO
SITUATION VS. PERSON DEBATE
If one formulates that traits and situations interact to influence behaviour, then
the formula for this could be as given below:
Behavior = personality × appraisal of the situation.
It is an important fact that individual differences exist in personality-situation
relationship. High self monitors try to adapt more to the situation and thus, display
less consistency across situations in their behaviour.
Thus one may state that some individuals show more consistent behaviour and
that traits do not influence behaviour consistently and emerge only in some
situations.  Another aspect is that whatever people do, it exhibits their traits. e.g.
choice of careers, choice of lifestyle etc.
Almost all researches have demonstrated that personality traits exist and are
predictive of behaviour. Some research has shown the correlation between
situations and behavioural outcomes to be ranging from 0.36 to 0.42 which is


===== PAGE 58 =====
62
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
almost identical to predictive power of personality traits. How far situations
determine behaviour even against one’s value system is an important issue here.
In this context, one of the studies was on the obedience factor carried out by
Stanley Milgram in which he used fake electric shock to study how people react
when they cause harm to others.  Given in the box below is the experiment:
The psychologist Stanley Milgram created an electric ‘shock generator’ with
30 switches. The switch was marked clearly in 15 volt increments, ranging
from 15 to 450 volts.
He also placed labels indicating the shock level, such as ‘Moderate’ (75-
120 V olts) and ‘Strong’ (135-180 V olts). The switches 375-420 V olts were
marked ‘Danger: Severe Shock’ and the two highest levels 435-450, was
marked ‘XXX’.
The ‘shock generator’ was in fact phony and would only produce sound
when the switches were pressed.
40 subjects participated all males. They thought they were going to participate
in an experiment about ‘memory and learning’. Next, the subject met an
‘experimenter’, the person leading the experiment, and another person told
to be another subject. The other subject was in fact a
confederate(experimenter’s man) acting as a subject. He was a 47 year old
male accountant.
The two subjects (the real subject and the confederate subject) drew slips of
paper to indicate who was going to be a ‘teacher’ and who was going to be
a ‘learner’. The lottery was in fact a set-up, and the real subject would always
get the role of ‘the teacher’.
The teacher saw that the learner was strapped to a chair and electrodes were
attached. The subject was then seated in another room in front of the shock
generator, unable to see the learner.
The Stanley Milgram Experiment aimed at getting an answer to the question:
“For how long will someone continue to give shocks to another person if
they are told to do so, even if they thought they could be seriously hurt?”
(the dependent variable)
Remember that they had met the other person, a likable stranger, and that
they thought that it could very well be them who were in the learner-position
receiving shocks.
The subject was instructed to teach word-pairs to the learner. When the
learner made a mistake, the subject was instructed to punish the learner by
giving him a shock, 15 volts higher for each mistake.
The learner never received the shocks, but pre-taped audio was triggered
when a shock-switch was pressed.
If the experimenter, seated in the same room, was contacted, the experimenter
would answer with predefined ‘prods’ (“Please continue”, “Please go on”,
“The experiment requires that you go on”, “It is absolutely essential that
you continue”, “You have no other choice, you must go on”), starting with
the mild prods, and making it more authoritarian for each time the subject
contacted the experimenter.


===== PAGE 59 =====
63
Key Issues in Personality
If the subject asked who was responsible if anything would happen to the
learner, the experimenter answered “I am responsible”. This gave the subject
a relief and many continued.
During the Stanley Milgram Experiment, many subjects showed signs of
tension. 3 subjects had “full-blown, uncontrollable seizures”.
Although most subjects were uncomfortable doing it, all 40 subjects obeyed
up to 300 volts.
25 of the 40 subjects continued to complete to give shocks until the maximum
level of 375 volts was reached.
Before the Stanley Milgram Experiment, experts thought that about 1-3 %
of the subjects would not stop giving shocks. They thought that you’d have
to be pathological or a psychopath to do so.
Still, 65 % never stopped giving shocks. None stopped when the learner
said he had heart-trouble. How could that be?
We now believe that it has to do with our almost innate behaviour that
we should do as told, especially from authority persons.
Source: http://www.experiment-resources.com/stanley-milgram-experiment.
html#ixzz13wADcJx9
However, the end of the debate was not completely one sided. It has also been
argued that trait psychologists could still not explain why behaviour has low
consistency over short periods, remaining at 0.30 ranges. On the other hand,
situations could also no longer take a stand that traits are not as important as
situations. This state of affairs made out a resolution that changed the conceptions
of psychologists of both traits and situations.
Regarding traits, psychologists learned that they do not have cross cultural
consistency for individual behaviours, but over time, they create consistency for
wide behaviour distributions. For situations, psychologists learned that situations
are not the only thing that matters.
On the basis of these formulations, a new definition of personality can be framed
which states that personality is one’s pattern of behavioural stability and change
due to the unique combination of having certain traits and being in certain
situations. Therefore, the current requirement in the area of personality is to
understand which of the person and situation forces account for patterns of stability
and change in behaviour.
The person-situation debate was a challenging task yet ultimately constructive
argument for personality psychology (Fleeson, 2004). By forcing psychologists
to think carefully about the links between behaviour, personality and situations,
the person-situation debate acted as a catalyst for a deeper appreciation of the
importance of personality and for a more sophisticated understanding of why
people do what they do.
4.5 NOMOTHETIC APPROACH VERSUS
IDIOGRAPHIC APPROACH TO PERSONALITY
Personality related psychological research and studies are grouped in three main
groups, viz., (i)  nomothetic, (ii) idiographic and (iii) complementary approaches
to personality.


===== PAGE 60 =====
64
Personality: Theories and
Assessment 4.5.1 Nomothetic Approach
Nomethetic approaches are based on the tendency to see one’s personality as
constant, hereditary and resistant to change, whereas the influence of the
environment is minimal. This way, nomothetic approaches state that the way in
which a person will act under certain circumstances can be calculated and
anticipated, foreseen. Gordon Allport (1934) identified this approach to
personality testing. The nomothetic approach relies on quantitative research
methods such as self report and questionnaires to establish universal behaviours.
He understood that scientific progress for trait psychology was rooted in a
nomothetic approach.
Thus, nomothetically derived traits were employed by Allport to describe people.
Allport (1937, 1961) employed traits as the primary basis which can be used to
describe people. Accordingly, he descriebd a trait as a “neuropsychic structure
that possesses the capacity to render many stimuli functionally equivalent. Allport
also assumed that traits are real. He formulated that traits are distinct and particular
to each person and their assessment shall be done uniquely.
4.5.2 Idiographic Approach
Allport also promoted another approach named as idiographic approach to the
study of personality. Here every individual is regarded as a combined system
that can be independently analysed scientifically. It means that each individual is
examined deeply and no general laws are considered important that are beyond
the individual to be studied.
Under the idiographic process, he believed that a person’s traits can be put into
various compartments according to their pervasiveness in an individual’s
personality. The most pervasive traits were referred to as “cardinal” dispositions
by Allport. If present, cardinal traits dominate the behaviour of an individual
aggressiveness, calmness etc. may be taken as examples. Another set of traits,
known as “central dispositions” comprise those that are pervasive for a given
individual. For example, the traits talked about while writing a letter of
recommendation. More situational specific traits are termed as “Secondary
dispositions”. Allport argued that each person possesses a unique pattern of
cardinal, central and secondary traits and to understand a person, the unique-
pattern examination is required.
Thus, the above discussion explains that the differences between a nomothetic
and an idiographic approach is not just a question of discovering on the part of
the psychologist, but also the methods employed are considered useful.
The nomothetic point of view has experiments, correlation, psychometric testing
and other quantitative methods as its examples. On the other hand, the idiographic
methods include case studies, informal interviews, unstructured observation and
other qualitative methods.
Self Assessment Questions
1) What is the person-situation controversy?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................


===== PAGE 61 =====
65
Key Issues in Personality
2) What- the person or the environment exert more influence in structuring
a person’s personality?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3) How does the interactionist approach handle the person-situation debate?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4) Discuss the nomothetic view to personality.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
5) Discuss the idiographic view to personality.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4.6 CROSS CULTURAL ISSUES
Personality and culture are interwoven and still their relationship cannot be
comprehended well. But it is also true that the culture of an individual is not the
sole determiner of an individual’s personality. The framework of individualism
versus collectivism can be utilised to observe this as it predisposes individualism
or collectivism. It is one of basic differences that have been described in varying
national cultures. Factors such as personal achievement, egalitarian relationships,
role flexibility team and familial connections etc. are used to describe personality
traits and differences between individuals of various cultures (Hofstede, 2001).
However, it is not possible to attribute all the factors under individualism-
collectivism web only to the cultural influence. The framework of individualism


===== PAGE 62 =====
66
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
collectivism is mainly used to describe personality characteristics traits and habits
generating from within cultures where certain individualist or collectivist traits
occur.
An element of doubt gets raised up while applying the principles of this framework
in personality perception of an individual as it may lead to stereotyping and
misinterpreting of an individual’s personality and his characteristic of behaviour.
The individualism famework can be of more use in describing cultural tendencies
as a whole rather than describing individual characteristics and traits. However,
this does not imply that the individualism collectivism paradigm is naïve and
can be excluded in studying the domain of personality. It can be easily inferred
from the above discussion that the interplay between personality and culture is
quite complex. It is also clear that even in adulthood, personality can be affected
by cultural expectations. Simultaneously, this is also to be acknowledged that
this individualism -collectivism orientation is not the only determining factor of
personality.
4.7 PERSONALITY TRAITS AND FIVE FACTOR
MODEL
As defined by McCrae & Costa in 1990, “Personality traits are the dimensions
of individual differences in tendencies to show consistent patterns of thoughts
feelings and actions.” Psychologists working in the area of personality like
Raymond Cattell, Eysenck have noted that organisation of traits can be done in
much smaller clusters of similar trait rather than studying each of the 4,000 traits
as identified by Allport and Odbert. Thus, a parsimonious structure of traits can
help a great deal in personality research.
Ending the decades long dispute about the mot suitable personality structure, the
Five Factor Model developed by McCrae & John, 1992 came up with five factors
or dimensions viz. Neuroticism (N),Extroversion (E), Openness to Experience
(O), Agreeableness (A) and conscientiousness (C). Individuals high in neuroticism
are likely to be anxious, irritable and low at emotional end and those low in
neuroticism are calm and emotionally stable. Extroverts are sociable, cheerful
and outgoing; introverts are shy and sober. Open men and women are curious
whereas closed people are run by conventions. Agreeable people are
compassionate, modest whereas conscientious are mainly driven by punctuality
and purposefulness.
Originally, the five factor model was discovered by analysing the English language
trait names and individuals standing on each of the five factors could be measured
by asking them to rate themselves on a series of adjectives (Goldeberg, 1992).
The most widely used measure of the Five Factor Model is the Revised NEO
Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R, Costa & McCrae, 1992). It assesses 30 specific
traits, six for each of the five factors.
4.7.1 The Five Factor Model Across Cultures
Personality factors in trait adjectives from different languages have been examined
with lexical studies and mixed results have surfaced from these studies which
show that E, A and C factors almost always appear but N and O disappear from
the picture sometimes. It is not clear whether these factors are not there in the
culture itself or are missing from the set of adjectives studied.


===== PAGE 63 =====
67
Key Issues in PersonalityThus, great caution should be used while comparing the personality scores across
cultures. Personality traits are expressed differently in different cultures and a
single set of questionnaire items does not suffice in every culture.
Self Assessment Questions
1) Discuss the cross- cultural issue in personality.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
2) What does the Five- Factor Model propose regarding personality?
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
3) Discuss the characteristic issue underlying Five- Factor Model across
cultures.
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
4.8 ISSUES RELATING TO THEORETICAL
MODELS
For the understanding and explanation of personality, various theoretical models
have been proposed. The different models have explained personality with respect
to their theoretical propositions e.g. the Psychoanalytic theory explains personality
taking intra-psychic and conscious-unconscious mind into account whereas the
Behaviorist model totally rejects this approach and emphasises the role of learning
and environment in the shaping and development of personality. The Humanistic
Model takes a different approach. It is true that every model seems to be correct
from its own perspective but when we consider the other models, many of their
features become redundant, irrelevant and may be invalid. Therefore, one, who
is interested in understanding the phenomenon of personality by going through
various theoretical accounts, may not be able to have a clear view of the personality
as construct. Therefore, there is a need of an eclectic model which incorporates
the features of various models into it and aids in shaping of personality.


===== PAGE 64 =====
68
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Some other issues in personality that need to be attended to at length are:
1) Free will vs determinism. Means that whether our behaviour is directed by
freedom intrinsic to our nature or by the ultimately determined forces.
2) Uniqueness vs Universality.  Implies that whether each person is unique in
his own existence or is driven by some universal behaviour patterns.
3) Physiological vs purposive motivation.  Some researchers assume that we
are pushed by basic physiological needs like food, water etc. while others
are of the view that we are pulled by our purpose, goals, values, principles
etc.
4) Conscious vs Unconscious motivation.  Some researchers believe that our
behaviour and experience are determined by conscious forces whereas others
say that we are not aware of the forces driving our behaviour, i.e. the
unconscious element.
5) Stage vs Non-stage theories of development. It is an extension of the nature
nurture issue that whether or not we all pass through predetermined stages
of development like fetal, childhood, puberty, adulthood, senescence-
controlled basically by genetics.
6) Cultural determinism vs Cultural transcendence. To what extent our
personality is molded by our cultures is the issue here. If not determined by
culture, our transcendence is some other kind of determinism.
7) Early Vs Late Personality Formation. This issue deals with if our personality
characteristics are established in early childhood or it is quite flexible in
adulthood. This question relates to the issues of genetics, external
determination etc. Here, the major limitation resolution is the confusion in
defining personality characteristics.
8) Optimism Vs Pessimism. Whether humans are basically good or bad is the
central issue here. The attitude determines what we see when we look at
humanity.
4.9 LET US SUM UP
To sum up, it can be said that the issues in personality consider classic and more
recent issues that are fundamental to the field of personality psychology. However,
various theorists have contributed to our understanding of personality but their
varying view points have led to various controversies that are still posing a
challenge to the area of personality. These issues need a timely resolution so that
the research in personality could be more refined and stable and the core areas
could be dealt with more precision and flawlessly.
4.10  UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Discuss the Nature- Nurture debate in the study of personality.
2) Discuss with examples what role does the environment play in molding an
individual’s personality.
3) What does the person-situation controversy depict about personality structure
of a person?


===== PAGE 65 =====
69
Key Issues in Personality4) “The interactionist approach gives a mid-way to person- situation
controversy” . Discuss.
5) “The cross-cultural issue in personality is difficult to be resolved” . Why?
6) What are the theoretical and methodological flaws in personality research?
7) What does the nomothetic versus idiographic debate in personality present?
8) What role can the Five- Factor Model play in resolving the Theoretical
controversy in personality research?
4.11 GLOSSARY
Idiographic approach : The psychological study of the single case/
individual.
Genes : The essential elements in the transmission
of hereditary characteristics.
Nature : The genetic factors contributing to behaviour
and perception.
Nature vs Nurture : The argument concerning the relative roles
controversy of the contributions of nature and nurture in
the development of organisms.
Nomothetic approach : Attempts to discover personality principles
that apply to people in general.
Nurture : Environmental factors contributing to
behaviour and perception.
Personality : The various enduring and distinctive patterns
of behaviour and thought that are
characteristic of a particular person.
4.12 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Ewen, R. B. (2003). An Introduction to Theories of Personality . New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kim, U., & Hakkoe, H. (1994). Individualism and Collectivism: Theory, Method
and Applications. Berkeley, CA: SAGE Publications.
McCrae, R., & Allik, K. (2002). The Five Factor Model of Perosnality Across
Cultures. New York, Springer.
McCrae, R. R. (2002). NEO-PI-R data from 36 cultures: Further intercultural
comparisons. In R. R. McCrae & J. Allik (Eds.), The Five-Factor Model of
Personality Across Cultures (pp. 105-126). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.
References
Allik, J., & McCrae, R. R. (2004). Toward a geography of personality traits:
Patterns of profiles across 36 cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
35, 13-28.


===== PAGE 66 =====
70
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Allport, G . W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait names: A psycho-lexical study.
Psychological Monographs, 47, (1 Whole No. 211).
Black, J. (2000). Personality testing and police selection: Utility of the ‘Big
Five’. New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 29, 2-9.
Blickle, G . (1996). Personality traits, learning strategies, and performance.
European Journal of Personality, 10, 337-352.
Cheung, F. M., & Leung, K. (1998). Indigenous personality measures: Chinese
examples. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29, 233-248.
Church, A. T. (2009). Prospects for an integrated trait and cultural psychology.
European Journal of Personality, 23, 153-182.
Costa, P . T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P . T., Jr., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences in
personality traits across cultures: Robust and surprising findings. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 322-331.
De Raad, B., & Perugini, M. (Eds.). (in press). Big Five assessment. Gottingen,
Germany: Hogrefe & Huber Publishers.
Draguns, J. R., Krylova, A. V ., Oryol, V . E., Rukavishnikov, A. A., & Martin, T.
A. (2000). Personality characteristics of the Nentsy in the Russian Arctic.
American Behavioral Scientist, 44, 126-140.
Epstein, Seymour. 1979. The Stability of Behavior: I. On Predicting Most of the
People Much of the Time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  37:
1097–1126.
Fleeson, William. 2001. Towards a Structure- and Process-Integrated View of
Personality: Traits as Density Distributions of States. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 80: 1011–1027.
Fleeson, William. 2004. Moving Personality Beyond the Person-Situation Debate:
The Challenge and Opportunity of Within-Person Variability. Current Directions
in Psychological Science 13: 83–87.
Funder, David C. 2005. Toward a Resolution of the Personality Triad: Persons,
Situations, and Behaviors. Journal of Research in Personality 40: 21–34.
Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The development of markers for the Big-Five factor
structure Psychological Assessment, 4, 26-42.
Guimond, S., Brunot, S., Chatard, A., Garcia, D. M., Martinot, D., Branscombe,
N. R., et al. (2007). Culture, gender, and the self: V ariations and impact of social
comparison processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1118-
1134.
Guthrie, G. M., & Bennett, A. B. (1971). Cultural differences in implicit
personality theory. International Journal of Psychology, 6, 305-312.


===== PAGE 67 =====
71
Key Issues in PersonalityHalim, M. S. (2001). Coping and quality of life in Indonesian breast cancer
patients. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Catholic University of Nijmegen.
Heine, S. J., Buchtel, E. E., & Norenzayan, A. (2008). What do cross-national
comparisons of personality traits tell us?: The case of conscientiousness.
Psychological Science, 19, 309-313.
Hofstede, G . (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviours,
institutions, and organisations across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Hofstede, G., & McCrae, R. R. (2004). Personality and culture revisited: Linking
traits and dimensions of culture. Cross-Cultural Research, 38, 52-88.
Jang, K. L., McCrae, R. R., Angleitner, A., Riemann, R., & Livesley, W. J. (1998).
Heritability of facet-level traits in a cross-cultural twin sample: Support for a
hierarchical model of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74, 1556-1565.
Jung, C. J. (1976). The portable Jung. (J. Campbell, Ed.) New York, NY: Penguin
Books.
McCrae, R. R. (2001). Trait psychology and culture: Exploring intercultural
comparisons. Journal of Personality, 69, 819-846.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P . T., Jr. (2003). Personality in adulthood: A Five-
Factor Theory perspective (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.
McCrae, R. R., & John, O. P . (1992). An introduction to the Five-Factor Model
and its applications. Journal of Personality, 60, 175-215.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., & 78 Members of the Personality Profiles of
Cultures Project. (2005a). Universal features of personality traits from the
observer’s perspective: Data from 50 cultures. Journal of Persoanlity and Social
Psychology, 88, 547-561.
Mischel, Walter. 1968. Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, Walter, and Yuichi Shoda. 1995. A Cognitive-Affective System Theory
of Personality: Reconceptualising Situations, Dispositions, Dynamics, and
Invariance in Personality Structure. Psychological Review 102: 246–268.
Perugini, M., & Richetin, J. (2007). In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is
king. European Journal of Personality, 21, 977-981.
Piedmont, R. L., Bain, E., McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (2002). The
applicability of the Five-Factor Model in a Sub-Saharan culture: The NEO-PI-R
in Shona. In R. R. McCrae & J. Allik (Eds.), The Five-Factor Model of personality
across cultures (pp. 155-173). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Poortinga, Y . H., V an de Vijver, F., & V an Hemert, D. A. (2002). Cross-cultural
equivalence of the Big Five: A tentative interpretation of the evidence. In R. R.
McCrae & J. Allik (Eds.), The Five-Factor Model across cultures (pp. 273-294).
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.


===== PAGE 68 =====
72
Personality: Theories and
Assessment
Somer, O., & Goldberg, L. R. (1999). The structure of Turkish trait-descriptive
adjectives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 431-450.
Terracciano, A., Abdel-Khalak, A. M., Adam, N., Adamovova, L., Ahn, C.-k.,
Ahn, H.-n., et al. (2005). National character does not reflect mean personality
trait levels in 49 cultures. Science, 310, 96-100.
Tupes, E. C., & Christal, R. E. (1992). Recurrent personality factors based on
trait ratings. Journal of Personality, 60, 225-251. (Original work published 1961)
Yang, J., Dai, X., Yao, S., Cai, T., Gao, B., McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr.
(2002). Personality disorders and the Five-Factor Model of personality in Chinese
psychiatric patients. In P. T. Costa, Jr. & T. A. Widiger (Eds.), Personality disorders
and the Five-Factor Model of personality (2nd ed., pp. 215-221). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Yang, K. S., & Lee, P . H. (1971). Likeability, meaningfulness and familiarity of
557 Chinese adjectives for personality trait description. Acta Psychologica
Taiwanica, 13, 36-37. (in Chinese)
