

===== PAGE 1 =====
49
Hans Eysenck: A Trait-
Type Theory of PersonalityUNIT 4 THE BIG FIVE FACTORS: THE
BASIC DIMENSIONS OF
PERSONALITY
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Objectives
4.2 Definition of the Big Five Factors
4.2.1 Discovery of the Big Five in Cattell’s Variable List
4.3 The Big Five Theory
4.3.1 Five Factor Model
4.3.2 Theoretical Perspectives on the Big Five: Description and Explanation
4.3.3 Advantages of the Big Five Structure
4.4 Measurement of the Big Five Inventory (BFI)
4.4.1 Big Five Personality Traits in Psychology
4.4.2 Important Characteristics of the Five Factors
4.4.3 Major Proponents of the Big Five and the Lexical Basis
4.4.4 Best Ways to Describe Personality
4.5 Let Us Sum Up
4.6 Unit End Questions
4.7 Glossary
4.8 Suggested Readings and References
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Research conducted during the last few decades has converged on the conclusion
that infact, there may be only five key or central dimensions of personality instead
of many personality dimensions. The trait and type theorists put forward many
dimensions of personality and delineated the characteristic features of the traits.
Using factor analysis from amongst a large number of dimensions, the researchers
identified clusters of dimensions and these formed the personality factors. Thus
the Big 5 personality dimensions are identified clusters of personality traits and
these can be delineated by a measurement tool (questionnaire). These are being
discussed in detail in this unit.
4.1 OBJECTIVES
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
• Define the Big 5 factor dimensions of personality;
• Explain the Big 5 factors;
• Analyse the methods by which the five factors were extracted; and
• Describe the methods by which these factors could be measured.

===== PAGE 2 =====
50
Theories of Personality-II
4.2 DEFINITION OF THE BIG FIVE FACTORS
Personality has been conceptualised from many theoretical perspectives. Each
has contributed to understanding of individual differences in behaviour and
experience. However so many personality scales to measure personality came
about as a result of continuing research and one had not overall rationale to use
a particular scale.
Thus personality psychology needed a descriptive model, a taxonomy of its subject
matter. One of the goals of taxonomie is to bring a number of specific instances
within a domain so as to understand it in a simple way. Thus in personality the
taxonomy will help to study specified domains of personality characteristics,
instead of examining separately thousands of particular attributes that make
individuals unique.
The Big Five personality dimension is the result of finding a general taxonomy
and these dimensions do not represent a particular theoretical perspective but
derived from people’s description of themselves and others in their natural
language. The Big Five instead of replacing the earlier systems, serves as an
integrative mechanism and represents the various and diverse systems of
personality description in a common framework.
Allport and Odbert’s classifications provided some initial structure for the
personality lexicon. Since taxonomy has to provide a systematic framework for
distinguishing, ordering and naming individual differences in people’s behaviour
and experience, they took a list of a large number of personality traits used in
common parlance. The size of that list was so huge that Cattell (1943) began
with a subset of 4500 trait items. Using semantic and empirical clustering
procedures Cattell reduced the 4500 items to a mere 35 variables. He used these
small set of variables to identify 12 personality factors which eventually became
a part of his 16 PF questionnaire.
4.2.1 Discovery of the Big Five in Cattell’s Variable List
Cattell’s work gave impetus to many research investigations and many were
involved in the discovery and clarification of the Big Five dimensions. First,
Fiske (1949) constructed simplified description from 22 variables of Cattell.
The factor structure were obtained from self ratings etc. They worked out a
correlational matrix from different samples and found clusters which they called
the Big five.
This five factor structure has been replicated by many in lists derived from Cattell’s
35 variables. These factors were initially labeled as (i) Extraversion or Surgency
(ii) Agreeableness (iii) Conscientiousness (iv) Emotional stability versus
neuroticism and (v) Culture. These factors came to be known as the Big Five .
These five dimension s represent personality at the broadest level of abstraction,
and each dimension summarises a large number of distinct, more specific
personality characteristics.
Following Fiske’s research, there were attempts by other researchers including
Norman (1967), Smith (1967), Goldberg (1981), and McCrae & Costa (1987).

===== PAGE 3 =====
51
The Big Five Factors: The
Basic Dimensions of
Personality
The “big five” are broad categories of personality traits. While there is a significant
body of literature supporting this five-factor model of personality, researchers
do not always agree on the exact labels for each dimension. However, these five
categories are usually described as follows:
Extraversion:  This is also called as Surgency. The broad dimension of
Extraversion encompasses specific traits as talkative, energetic, and assertive.
More specifically these include characteristics such as excitability, sociability,
talkativeness, assertiveness, and high amounts of emotional expressiveness.
Agreeableness: This factor includes traits like sympathetic, kind, and affectionate.
It also includes attributes such as trust, altruism, kindness, affection, and other
prosocial behaviours.
Conscientiousness: This includes traits like organised, thorough, and planful
tendencies. Common features of this dimension include high levels of
thoughtfulness, with good impulse control and goal-directed behaviours. Those
high in conscientiousness tend to be organised and mindful of details.
Neuroticism: This is sometimes reversed and called Emotional Stability. This
dimension includes traits like tense, moody, and anxious. Individuals high in
this trait tend to experience emotional instability, anxiety, moodiness, irritability,
and sadness.
Openness to Experience: This is also called as Intellect or Intellect/Imagination.
This dimension includes traits like having wide interests, and being imaginative
and insightful. Those high in this trait also tend to have a broad range of interests.
These dimensions represent broad areas of personality. Research has demonstrated
that these groupings of characteristics tend to occur together in many people.
For example, individuals who are sociable tend to be talkative. However, these
traits do not always occur together. Personality is complex and varied and each
person may display behaviours across several of these dimensions.
Each of the Big Five factors is quite broad and consists of a range of more specific
traits. The Big Five structure was derived from statistical analyses of which traits
tend to co-occur in people’s descriptions of themselves or other people. The
underlying correlations are probabilistic, and exceptions are possible. For
example, talkativeness and assertiveness are both traits associated with
Extraversion, but they do not go together by logical necessity. One could imagine
somebody who is assertive but not talkative (the “strong, silent type”). However,
many studies indicate that people who are talkative are usually also assertive
(and vice versa), which is why they go together under the broader Extraversion
factor.
For this reason, one should be clear about the research goals when choosing the
measures. If it expected that one has to to make finer distinctions (such as between
talkativeness and assertiveness), a broad-level Big Five instrument will not be
enough. One may have to use one of the longer inventories that make facet-level
distinctions (like the NEO PI-R or the IPIP scales. or one could supplement a
shorter inventory (like the Big Five Inventory) with additional scales that measure
the specific dimensions that you are interested in.

===== PAGE 4 =====
52
Theories of Personality-II It is also worth noting that there are many aspects of personality that are not
subsumed within the Big Five. The term personality trait has a special meaning
in personality psychology that is narrower than the everyday usage of the term.
Motivations, emotions, attitudes, abilities, self-concepts, social roles,
autobiographical memories, and life stories are just a few of the other “units”
that personality psychologists study.
Some of these other units may have theoretical or empirical relationships with
the Big Five traits, but they are conceptually distinct. For this reason, even a very
comprehensive profile of somebody’s personality traits can only be considered
a partial description of their personality.
4.3 THE BIG FIVE THEORY
Let us see the difference between the terms Big Five, Five-Factor Model, and
Five-Factor Theory.
The Big Five are, collectively, a taxonomy of personality trait. It is a coordinate
system that maps which traits go together in people’s descriptions or ratings of
one another.
The Big Five are an empirically based phenomenon, not a theory of personality.
The Big Five factors were discovered through a statistical procedure called factor
analysis, which was used to analyse how ratings of various personality traits are
correlated in humans.
The original derivations relied heavily on American and Western European
samples, and researchers are still examining the extent to which the Big Five
structure generalises across cultures.
4.3.1 Five Factor Model
The Five-Factor Model is a term used often instead of the “Big Five.” In scientific
usage, the word “model” can refer either to a descriptive framework of what has
been observed, or to a theoretical explanation of causes and consequences.
The Five-Factor Model (i.e., Big Five) is a model in the descriptive sense only.
The term “Big Five” was coined by Lew Goldberg and was originally associated
with studies of personality traits used in natural language.
The term “Five-Factor Model” has been more commonly associated with studies
of traits using personality questionnaires. The two research traditions yielded
largely consonant models and in current practice the terms are often used
interchangeably. A subtle but sometimes important area of disagreement between
the lexical and questionnaire approaches is over the definition and interpretation
of the fifth factor, called Intellect/Imagination by many lexical researchers and
Openness to Experience by many questionnaire researchers.
4.3.2 Theoretical Perspectives on the Big Five: Description and
Explanation
Over the years many perspectives on the concept of the Big Five dimensions
have been presented. As is known the Big Five were first discovered in lexical
research to provide taxonomy of trait items and thus the factors were initially

===== PAGE 5 =====
53
The Big Five Factors: The
Basic Dimensions of
Personality
interpreted as dimensions of trait or attribution. Further research showed that the
dimensions have external /predictive validity and all five of them show equal
heritability. Since the Big Five dimensions refer to real individual differences,
one must find out as to how these differences are conceptualised.
Several theories conceptualise the Big Five as relational constructs. In
Interpersonal theory the theoretical emphasis is on the individual in relationships.
According to Sullivan (1953) the Big Five describe the enduring patterns of
recurrent interpersonal situations that characterise human life. However, Wiggins
and Trapnell (1996) are of the view that interpersonal motives are important and
thus they interpret all the Big Five dimensions in terms of their interpersonal
implications.
Socioanalytic theory by Hogan (1996) focuses on the social functions of self and
other perceptions and he points out that traits are socially constructed to serve
interpersonal functions. As trait terms are about reputation that is the individual
considers how others view them , the possibility of the person distorting the self
reports and questionnaires is high. Thus self deceptive bias enters and one does
not get the true picture of the individual’s personality.
The evolutionary theory on the Big Five states that humans have evolved
“difference detecting mechanisms” to perceive individual differences that are
important for survival and reproduction(D.M. Buss & Shackelford, 1997). Buss
views personality as one where the Big Five traits represent the most salient and
important dimensions of the individual’s survival needs. This theory emphasises
both person perception and individual differences and point out that the Big
Five summarises the centrally important individual differences.
McCrae and Costa (1996) view Big Five as causal personality dispositions. Their
five factor theory (FFT) explains the Big Five taxonomy. According to FFT, the
Big GFive imensions have a substantial genetic base and hence derive from
biological structures and processes. According to this theory, personality traits
are basic tendencies that refer to the underlying potentials of the individual. On
the other hand attitudes, roles, relationships and goals are characteristic
adaptations that reflect the interaction between the basic tendencies and
environmental demands. While basic tendencies remain stable across life, the
adaptations undergo considerable changes.
Another theory is the comparative approach to personality that studies individual
differences in both human and non humans. Thus there are a diverse theories
regarding the Big Five dimensions from purely descriptive to biologically based
causal concepts. These perspectives however are not mutually exclusive. Research
in areas like behaviour genetics, molecular genetics, personality stability and
change, and accuracy and bias in interpersonal perception will help in building
and refining a comprehensive theory of Big Five.
4.3.3 Advantages of the Big Five Structure
The Big Five structure has the advantage of everyone being able to understand
definitions and meanings used in describing this concept. Several of the
dimensions of the Big Five especially Extraversion and Neuroticism have been
explained both from physiological and mechanistic perspectives. In one sense,
the Big Five differentiate domains of individual differences that have similar

===== PAGE 6 =====
54
Theories of Personality-II surface manifestations. The Big Five structure is a major step ahead in that it
captures the commonalities amongs most of the existing systems of personality
description, and provides an integrative descriptive model.
Five-Factor Theory includes a number of propositions about the nature, origins,
and developmental course of personality traits, and about the relation of traits to
many of the other personality variables mentioned earlier. Five-Factor Theory
presents a biological account of personality traits, in which learning and
experience play little if any part in influencing the Big Five.
Five-Factor Theory is not the only theoretical account of the Big Five. Other
personality psychologists have proposed that environmental influences, such as
social roles, combine and interact with biological influences in shaping personality
traits. For example, Brent Roberts has recently advanced an interactionist approach
under the name Social Investment Theory.
Finally, it is important to note that the Big Five are used in many areas of
psychological research in ways that do not depend on the specific propositions
of any one theory. For example, in interpersonal perception research the Big
Five are a useful model for organising people’s perceptions of one another’s
personalities. I have argued that the Big Five are best understood as a model of
reality-based person perception. In other words, it is a model of what people
want to know about one another (Srivastava, 2010).
Regardless of whether you endorse any particular theory of personality traits, it
is still quite possible that you will benefit from measuring and thinking about
the Big Five in your research.
4.4 MEASUREMENT OF THE BIG FIVE
INVENTORY (BFI)
Big Five Invantory (BFI) is a self-report inventory designed to measure the Big
Five dimensions. It is quite brief for a multidimensional personality inventory
(44 items total), and consists of short phrases with relatively accessible vocabulary.
A copy of the BFI, with scoring instructions, is reprinted in the chapter as an
appendix (the last 2 pages). It is also available through Oliver John’s lab website.
No permission is needed to use the BFI for noncommercial research purposes
(see below).
What are other ways of measuring the Big Five?
The BFI is not your only option for measuring the Big Five...
The International Personality Item Pool, developed and maintained by Lew
Goldberg, has scales constructed to work as analogs to the commercial NEO PI-
R and NEO-FFI scales (see below). IPIP scales are 100% public domain - no
permission required, ever.
Colin DeYoung and colleagues have published a 100-item measure, called the
Big Five Aspect Scales (BFAS), which scores not only the Big Five factors, but
also two “aspects” of each. The BFAS is in the public domain as well.
If you want items that are single adjectives, rather than full sentences (like the
NEO) or short phrases (like the BFI and IPIP), you have several options. For

===== PAGE 7 =====
55
The Big Five Factors: The
Basic Dimensions of
Personality
starters, there is Lew Goldberg’s set of 100 trait-descriptive adjectives (published
in Psychological Assessment, 1992). Gerard Saucier reduced this set to 40 Big
Five mini-markers that have excellent reliability and validity ( Journal of
Personality Assessment, 1994). More recently, Saucier has developed new trait
marker sets that maximize the orthogonality of the factors (Journal of Research
in Personality, 2002). Saucier’s mini-markers are in the public domain.
The NEO PI-R is a 240-item inventory developed by Paul Costa and Jeff McCrae.
It measures not only the Big Five, but also six “facets” (subordinate dimensions)
of each of the Big Five. The NEO PI-R is a commercial product, controlled by a
for-profit corporation that expects people to get permission and, in many cases,
pay to use it. Costa and McCrae have also created the NEO-FFI, a 60-item
truncated version of the NEO PI-R that only measures the five factors. The NEO-
FFI is also commercially controlled.
If you need a super-duper-short measure of the Big Five, you can use the Ten
Item Personality Inventory, recently developed by Sam Gosling, Jason Rentfrow,
and Bill Swann. But read their journal article first (it is on Sam Gosling’s web
page). There are substantial measurement tradeoffs associated with using such a
short instrument, which the article discusses.
As mentioned earlier, the IPIP scales, Saucier’s mini-markers, and the Big
Five Aspect Scales are all in the public domain and may be used for any purpose
with no restrictions.
Additionally, the BFI (which is copyrighted by Oliver P. John) is freely available
to researchers who wish to use it for research (not commercial) purposes. More
details are available on Oliver John’s lab website. If you cannot find your questions
answered there, you can contact Laura Naumann (naumann@berkeley.edu) for
further information.
4.4.1 Big Five Personality Traits in Psychology
The “Big Five” Personality Dimensions
Extroversion : activity and energy level traits, sociability and emotional
expressiveness.
Agreeableness: altruism, trust, modesty, prosocial attitudes.
Conscientiousness : Impulse control, goal directed behaviour.
Neuroticism : emotional stability, anxiety, sadness, and irritability
Openness: Breadth, Complexity, and depth of an individuals life.
These five dimensions have been used to account for variance in: i) Academic
Achievement (ii) Work Performance (iii) Well Being Juvenile Delinquency (iv)
The Big Five Personality Traits in Psychology (v) The person’s Personal
Dimensions Affect All Aspects of Life
One does not need a Myers Briggs Personality Test to know if your personality
type is working for or against you! Here are the Big Five Personality Traits and
how they work.
The Big Five Personality Traits affect the person’s health, relationships, goals,
achievements, professional success, and even the spiritual life. The person’s whole

===== PAGE 8 =====
56
Theories of Personality-II life is affected both positively and negatively by the Big Five Personality Traits!
The fundamental five personality characteristics - called the “Big Five Personality
Traits” among psychologists - were once thought to remain the same since
childhood. Now, experts believe the Big Five Personality Traits change over
time.
The five-factor model is comprised of five personality dimensions (OCEAN):
Openness to Experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and
Neuroticism. The five dimensions are held to be a complete description of
personality.
A competing model with three dimensions based on psychophysiology is the
PEN Model. Extraversion and Agreeableness are only rotations of the dimensions
in Interpersonal Theory.
A trait is a temporally stable, cross-situational individual difference. Currently
the most popular approach among psychologists for studying personality traits
is the five-factor model or Big Five dimensions of personality. The five factors
were derived from factor analyses of a large number of self- and peer reports on
personality-relevant adjectives and questionnaire items.
4.4.2 Important Characteristics of the Five Factors
The following are some of the important characteristics of the five factors:
1) First, the factors are dimensions, not types, so people vary continuously on
them, with most people falling in between the extremes.
2) Second, the factors are stable over a 45-year period beginning in young
adulthood (Soldz & V aillant, 1999).
3) Third, the factors and their specific facets are heritable (i.e., genetic), at
least in part (Jang, McCrae, Angleitner, Riemann, & Livesley, 1998; Loehlin,
McCrae, Costa, & John, 1998).
4) Fourth, the factors probably had adaptive value in a prehistoric environment
(Buss, 1996).
5) Fifth, the factors are considered universal, having been recovered in languages
as diverse as German and Chinese (McCrae & Costa, 1997).
6) Sixth, knowing one’s placement on the factors is useful for insight and
improvement through therapy (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
The differences between two empirically related yet conceptually distinct models,
the Big Five and the five-factor model, are summarised below.
4.4.3 Major Proponents of the Big Five and the Lexical Basis
Goldberg
FFM: McCrae and Costa
Lexical basis
Lexical hypothesis—those individual differences that are most salient and socially
relevant will come to be encoded as terms in the natural language.

===== PAGE 9 =====
57
The Big Five Factors: The
Basic Dimensions of
Personality
Five Factor Model (FFM): Theoretical contexts—traits are situated in a
comprehensive model of genetic and environmental causes and contexts.
Position on causation
Big 5: Phenotypic and no stance on causation.
Five Factor Model (FFM). Biosocial, genetic as well as environmental.
Naming of factors
Big 5: Surgency, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and
Intellect.
Five Factor Model (FFM). Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness,
Neuroticism, and Openness to Experience (OCEAN).
Measurement Model
Big 5:  Circular measurement, that is, many items have non-zero correlations
(loadings) on two factors rather than just one.
Five Factor Model . Hierarchical measurement , that is, lower-level facets combine
to form higher-level domains.
Questionnaires
Big 5: Big Five Markers (recently, International Personality Item Pool, or IPIP).
FFM. Revised Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness Personality Inventory (NEO-
PI-R).
Type of Questionnaire Items
Big 5. Adjectives (recently, sentence stems).
FFM. Sentences.
Saucier and Goldberg (1998) presented evidence that nearly all clusters of
personality-relevant adjectives can be subsumed under the Big Five.
One of the shortcomings of the Big 5 is that though very useful, it must be stated
that there are several important personality traits that lie beyond the Big Five.
In addition, theoretical reasons suggest the importance of other personality traits
that are poorly captured by terms in the natural language, such as impulsive,
sensation-seeking etc.
Furthermore, traits may be only a limited means of studying a “psychology of
the stranger”, that is, they may include only the personality relevant information
that would be apparent about someone about whom one knew very little else.
Thus it leaves other important constructs such as narrative life story etc.,
uncovered.
4.4.4 Best way to Describe Personality
What are the best ways to describe an individual’s personality? One might list
all of the things that individuals do all day every day of their lives, but that
would take too long and be far too detailed to be of much use.
Alternatively, one might use more abstract attributes as a way of summarizing
the major ways that individuals differ from each other. Every language has

===== PAGE 10 =====
58
Theories of Personality-II hundreds of words that refer to the ways that individuals differ. The English
language includes at least 20,000 words of that sort (for example, talkative,
agreeable, hard-working, nervous, intelligent).
Perhaps those terms that make it into a language and then stay there for centuries
are those that people have found to be most useful for describing themselves and
others. This “lexical hypothesis” is the basis of much modern research on the
structure of human personality traits.
The terms that are descriptive of personality can be used by individuals to describe
themselves and others.
For example, one could ask a question, “How talkative is Ram? “ The answer
could be in a continuum, viz., Not at all (1) A little bit (2) Somewhat (3)
Moderately (4) and Extremely(5).
In general, one can measure the extent of similarity between pairs of personality
terms with a statistic called the “correlation coefficient.” Based on the
intercorrelations among all pairs of personality terms, one can then group the
terms into categories or clusters using a statistical procedure called “factor
analysis.” The result of research using those statistical techniques is a tentative
answer to the important scientific question: “How many different relatively
independent kinds of terms are there in that specific language?”
In many languages, it has turned out that the magical number is something like
five or six. In English and other northern European languages like German and
Dutch, there has seemed to be five major dimensions or “factors” to represent
the majority of personality-descriptive terms in that language. This “Big-Five”
factor structure has become a scientifically useful taxonomy to understand
individual differences in personality traits.
The Big Five factors
1) The first is Extraversion versus Introversion, which includes traits such as
Active, Assertive, Energetic, Gregarious, and Talkative versus their
opposites.
2) A second factor is called Agreeableness, which includes traits such as
Amiable, Helpful, Kind, Sympathetic, and Trusting versus their opposites.
3) A third factor has been labeled Conscientiousness, which includes such traits
as Dependable, Hard-working, Responsible, Systematic, and Well-organised
versus their opposites.
4) A fourth factor contrasts traits related to Emotional Stability, such as Calm,
Relaxed, and Stable, with opposite traits such as Afraid, Nervous, Moody,
and Temperamental.
5) And, finally, there is a constellation of traits related to Intellect and
Imagination, such as Artistic, Creative, Gifted, Intellectual, and Scholarly
versus their opposites.
Most personality-related words in many modern languages can be classified by
their locations in the five-dimensional space provided by the Big-Five factors.
Terms are scattered throughout this five-dimensional space, with most terms
being blends of two or three of the Big-Five factors. As a consequence, this five-

===== PAGE 11 =====
59
The Big Five Factors: The
Basic Dimensions of
Personality
factor model provides a rich framework for classifying personality traits, and
measures of those five broad dimensions have proven to be extremely useful for
describing individual persons. Indeed, measures of the Big-Five factors have
proven to predict educational and occupational attainment, marital success, good
health habits and medical outcomes, and even longevity versus mortality.
Many researches believe that these dimensions are indeed the basic ones. This is
indicated, by the fact that these dimensions are ones to which most people in
many cultures refer in describing themselves(Funder & Colvin,1991 ).If the big
five dimensions of personality are really so basic ,then it is reasonable to expect
that they will be related to important forms of behaviour.
Many studies indicate that this is the case. Where people stand on the big five
dimensions is closely linked to important outcomes, such is their success in
performing many jobs(e.g., Hogan, Hogan & Roberts,1996).Many psychologists
now view the the big five basic dimensions as truly basic,there is not total
consensus on this point. For example, Eysenck (1994), believes that there only
three basic dimensions-extraversion, neuroticism and psychoticism.
Other psychologists (e.g.,Block,1995) believe that the methods on which the big
five dimensions are based (largely the technique of factor analysis) are inadequate.
Lastly many psychologists view the big five as providing important insights into
the key dimensions of personality.
4.5 LET US SUM UP
The controversy regarding the number of basic personality traits has taken an
interesting turn in recent years .Costa & McCrae have examined all possible
personality traits. The findings indicate a set of five factors.They are pften called
Big-Five Factors.These factors include: extraversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, emotional stability, and openness to experience.This model
represents an important theoretical development in the field of personality.It has
been found useful in understanding the personality profile of people across
cultures.While it is consistent with the analysis of personality traits found in
different languages, it is also supported by the studies of personality carried out
through different methods.Thus, it is now considered to be the most promising
empirical approach to the study of personality.
4.6 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) What are the big –five dimensions of personality? Describe each dimension
ind detail.
2) Discuss Eysenck’s three major trait dimensions of personality as largely
responsible for a significant portion of human behaviour.
3) Discuss the various theoretical perspectives of the Big 5.
4) Discuss how individual variations along each trait dimension reflect
differences in neurophysiological functioning?
5) How was Big 5 discovered?
6) Who are the major proponents of Big 5 ? Discuss the lexical basis of Big 5.

===== PAGE 12 =====
60
Theories of Personality-II
4.7 GLOSSARY
Extraversion : one of the big-five dimensions of
personality;ranges from sociable, talkative and
enthusiastic at one end to sober, reserved , and
cautious at the other.
Agreeableness : one of the big-five dimensions of personality;
ranges from good natured, cooperative, trusting
at one end to irritable, suspicious, uncooperative
at the other.
Conscientiousness : one of the big-five dimensions of personality;
ranges from well-organised, careful and
responsible at one end to disorganised, careless,
and unscrupulous at the other.
Emotional Stability : one of the big-five dimensions of personality;
ranges from poised, calm ,and composed at one
end to nervous, anxious, and excitable at the
other; also called neuroticism.
Openness to Experience : one of the big-five dimensions of personality;
ranges from imaginative, witty. And intellectual
at one end to down-to –earth, simple, and narrow
in interests at the other.
4.8 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Baron,R.A.(2005). Psychology. (Fifth Edition)Pearson India, Delhi.
Eysenck,H.J.(1994).The Big-five or Giant three:Criteria for a paradigm. In
C.F.Halverson,Jr.,G .A.Honhnstamm &R.P.Martin(Eds.).The developing structure
of temperament & personality from infancy to childhood(pp 37-51). Hillsdale,
NJ:Earlbaum.
Zuckerman,m.(1994).Behavioural expressions and biosocial bases of sensation
seeking.NY:Cambridge University Press.
References
Block,J.H.(1995).A contrarian view of the five- factor approach to personality
description.Psychological Bulletin,117,187-215.
Costa,P .T.,Jr.,& McCrae,R.R.(1994).The NEO PI/NEO-FFI Manual
supplement.Odessa,FL:Psychological Assessment Research.
Funder,D.C., & Colvin,C.R.(1991).Exploration in behavioural consistency:
Properties of persons ,situation and behaviour. Journal of Personality &Social
Psychology,60,773-794.
Hogan,R.,Hogan,J.,& Roberts,B.W.(1996)Personality measurement employment
decisions:Question and Answers.American Psychologist,51,469-477.