

===== PAGE 1 =====
5
Cognitive Psychology
UNIT 1 COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
“Mind and world … have evolved together, and in consequence are something
of a mutual fit”.
– William James
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Objectives
1.2 Cognitive Psychology: An Introduction
1.3 Research Methods in Cognitive Psychology
1.3.1 Goals of Research
1.3.2 Distinctive Research Methods
1.4 Domains of Cognitive Psychology
1.5 A Brief History of Cognitive Psychology
1.5.1 Early Thoughts of Thinking
1.5.2 Cognition in the Renaissance and Beyond
1.5.3 Cognitive Psychology in Early Twentieth Centuary
1.5.4 Cognitive Psychology — As it is Today
1.6 Key Issues in the Study of Cognitive Psychology
1.7 Key Ideas in Cognitive Psychology
1.7.1 Computer Metaphor and Human Cognition
1.7.2 Cognitive Science
1.7.3 Neuroscience and Cognitive Psychology
1.8 Let Us Sum Up
1.9 Unit End Questions
1.10 Suggested Readings and References
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Cognitive psychology is the study of mental processes such as perceiving,
remembering, and reasoning. Why do psychologists study mental processes?
Since the beginning of recorded history, people have expressed curiosity about
the operation of the mind, largely because they believed that behaviour is the
result of mental processes. For example, how are we to understand the very
behaviour in which you are engaged at this moment, reading this course book?
At one level, we are interested in explaining your ability to comprehend what
you are reading, and in so doing, we are likely to appeal to processes of perception
of words and computation of meaning. At another level, we might explain your
motivation for reading in terms of your goal to complete this course, which in
turn is motivated by your goal of obtaining a degree in order to follow some plan
that you have for a career. The point is that your behaviour of reading this book
is determined in part by your intent to meet some goal and fulfill some plan.
Intentionality, goals, and plans are mental phenomena that affect behaviour.
Further, the specific behaviour, in this case, reading, is understood by appeal to
the specific mental processes involved in perception and comprehension of text.
In short, the study of mental processes is important because these processes are
responsible for much of our behaviours. In this unit you will be studying the
definition and description of cognitive psychology, distinctive research methods,
domains of cognitive psychology, metaphor of cognition etc.

===== PAGE 2 =====
6
Information Processing
1.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Field of cognitive psychology;
• Provide a foundation on which to build an understanding of the topics in
cognitive psychology;
• Describes some of the intellectual history of the study of human thinking;
and
• Emphasises some of the issues and concerns that arise when we think about
how people think.
1.2 COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY: AN
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive psychology is the study of how people perceive, learn, remember, and
think about information. A cognitive psychologist might study how people
perceive various shapes, why they remember some facts but forget others, or
how they learn language. Consider some examples of everyday experiences that
are also of theoretical interest to cognitive psychologists:
How many times have you carefully proofread written work, only to be
embarrassed later by an obvious error you overlooked?
Many times what we see is determined as much by the context in which it occurs
as by what is actually there, an issue of pattern recognition.
Have you noticed the difficulty of simultaneously taking notes in class and
understanding a lecture?
Explanations of this kind of difficulties are found in the discussion of attention.
When you dial the telephone directory assistance for a telephone number and do
not have a pen to note it down, why do you have to repeat the number until you
have dialed it? And why you have to make your call again to enquire the number
if someone talks to you before you dial the number?
These are problems associated with the short term memory.
Do you remember the experience of working on a problem or a puzzle that you
were unable to solve, but after taking a break from the problem, you subsequently
obtained a solution?
This phenomenon, known as incubation effect, along with other commonly
experienced events is an aspect of problem solving.
Why do objects look farther away on foggy days than they really are? This
discrepancy of perception can be dangerous, even deceiving drivers into having
accidents.
These are just a few of the many examples of everyday experiences which are
discussed and explored by the experiments and theory of cognitive psychology.
Two points about these examples should be considered as we attempt to gain an
overview of cognitive psychology.

===== PAGE 3 =====
7
Cognitive Psychology1) All represent instances of difficulty or failure of mental processes. We rarely
think of them unless they fail to work. Failure of mental processes are
immediately noticed because they can be frustrating, embarrassing, and
sometimes even dangerous and, consequently, such failures become useful
tools for the psychological analysis of mental phenomena.
2) Cognitive psychology is interested in what is generally called mental
phenomena. In this sense, the examples just discussed are consistent with
the dictionary definition of cognitive psychology: “the scientific study of
the mind”.
While it is hoped that examples help clarify the definition, questions undoubtedly
remain concerning how one goes about this ‘scientific study of mind’. To address
these questions, here’s a brief discussion of the scientific methods, followed by
an extensive description of the important historical events leading up to modern
cognitive psychology.
Next is a brief overview of the major methods, issues, and content areas of
cognitive psychology.
1.3 RESEARCH METHODS IN COGNITIVE
PSYCHOLOGY
This consists of the various research methods that we use in cognitive psychology.
Every research has a goal and it is achieved through appropriate methodology.
Let  us see what are the goals of research.
1.3.1 Goals of Research
To better understand the specific methods used by cognitive psychologists, one
must grasp the goals of research in cognitive psychology. Briefly, those goals
include data gathering, data analysis, theory development, hypothesis formulation,
hypothesis testing, and perhaps even application to settings outside the research
environment. However, most cognitive psychologists want to understand more
than cognition. They  also seek to understand the how and the why of thinking.
That is, researchers seek ways to explain cognition as well as describe it. To
move beyond descriptions, cognitive psychologists must leap from what is
observed directly to what can be inferred regarding observations.
1.3.2 Distinctive Research Methods
Cognitive psychologists use various methods to explore how humans think. These
methods include (i) laboratory or other controlled experiments, (ii)
psychobiological research, (iii) self-reports, case studies, naturalistic observation,
and (iv) computer simulations and artificial intelligence. Each method offers
distinctive advantages and disadvantages.
i) Experiments on Human Behaviour: In controlled experimental designs,
an experimenter conducts research, typically in a laboratory setting. The
experimenter controls as many aspects of the experimental situation as
possible. There are basically two kinds of variables in any given experiment
– independent variables and dependent variables. The irrelevant variables
are held constant and are called control variables. In implementing

===== PAGE 4 =====
8
Information Processing experimental method, the experimenter must use a representative and
random sample of the population of interest. S/he must also exert rigorous
control over the experimental conditions. If those requisites for the
experimental method are fulfilled, the experimenter may be able to infer
probable causality. This influence is of the effects of the independent variable
(the treatment) on the dependent variable (the outcome) for the given
population.
ii) Psychobiological Research:  Through psychobiological research ,
investigators study the relationship between cognitive performance and
cerebral events and situations. The various specific techniques used in the
psychobiological research generally fall into three categories. The first
category is that of techniques for studying an individual’s brain post-mortem,
relating the individual’s cognitive function prior to death to observable
features of the brain. The second category is techniques for studying images
showing structures of or activities in the brain of an individual who is known
to have a particular cognitive deficit. The third is techniques for obtaining
information about cerebral processes during the normal performance of a
cognitive activity (e.g. by using brain imaging techniques).
iii) Self-Reports, Case Studies, and Naturalistic Observation:  Individual
experiments and psychobiological studies often focus on precise
specification of discrete aspects of cognition across individuals. To obtain
richly textured information about how particular individuals think in a broad
range of contexts, researchers may use self-reports (an individual’s own
account of cognitive processes), case studies  (in-depth studies of
individuals), and naturalistic observation  (detailed studies of cognitive
performance in everyday situations and no laboratory contexts). On the
one hand, experimental research is most useful for testing hypotheses. On
the other hand, research based on qualitative methods is often particularly
useful for the formulation of hypotheses. These methods are also useful to
generate descriptions of rare events or processes that we have no other way
to measure.
iv) Computer Simulations and Artificial Intelligence:  Digital computers
played a fundamental role in the emergence of the study of cognitive
psychology. One kind of influence is indirect though models of human
cognition based on models of how computers process information. Another
kind is direct, that is through computer simulations and artificial intelligence.
In computer simulations, researchers program computers to imitate a given
human function or process. Some researchers even have attempted to create
computer models of the entire cognitive architecture of the human mind.
Their models have stimulated heated discussions regarding how the human
mind may function as a whole. Sometimes the distinction between
simulation and artificial intelligence is blurred. It is also possible to combine
the two approaches.
Cognitive psychologists often broaden and deepen their understanding of
cognition through research in cognitive science. Cognitive science is a cross-
disciplinary field that uses ideas and methods from cognitive psychology,
psychobiology, artificial intelligence, philosophy, linguistics, and anthropology.
Cognitive psychologists use these ideas and methods to focus on the study of

===== PAGE 5 =====
9
Cognitive Psychologyhow humans acquire and use knowledge. They also work in collaboration with
other psychologists, such as social psychologists (in the field of social cognition),
psychologists who study motivation and emotion, and engineering psychologists
(who study human-machine interactions).
1.4 DOMAINS OF COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
Modern cognitive psychology freely, draws theories and techniques; from twelve
principal areas of research (see Figure 1.1). Each area, in brief, is described
below:
i) Cognitive Neuroscience: Only within the past few years have cognitive
psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists formed a close working
relationship. Thus far, this union has produced some of the most provocative
developments in the study of our mental character. Cognitive psychologists
are seeking neurological explanations for their findings, and neuroscientists
are turning to cognitive psychologists to explain observations made in their
laboratories. Every part of the cognitive process from sensation to memory
is supported by basic electrochemical processes taking place in the brain
and nervous system.
Fig. 1.1: Principal research areas of cognitive psychology
ii) Perception: The branch of psychology directly involved with the detection
and interpretation of sensory stimuli is perception. From experiments in
perception, we have a good understanding of the sensitivity of the human
organism to sensory signals and more important to cognitive psychology of
the way we interpret sensory signals. The experimental study of perception
has helped identify many of the parts of this process. However, the study of
perception alone does not adequately account for the expected performance;
other cognitive systems are involved, including pattern recognition, attention,
consciousness, and memory.
Thinking and
Concept Formation
Cognitive
Psychology
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Pattern
Recognition
Human and Artificial
Intelligence
Cognitive
Neuroscience
Perception
Attention
 Representation
of knowledge
Consciousness
Memory
Imagery
Language
Developmental
Psychology

===== PAGE 6 =====
10
Information Processing iii) Pattern Recognition: Environmental stimuli rarely are perceived as single
sensory events; they usually are perceived as part of a more meaningful
pattern. The things we sense – see, hear, feel, taste, or smell—are almost
always part of a complex pattern of sensory stimuli. Think about the problem
of reading. Reading is a complex effort in which the reader is required to
form a meaningful pattern from an otherwise meaningless array of lines
and curves. By organising the stimuli that make up letters and words, the
reader may then access meaning from his or her memory. The entire process
takes place in a fraction of a second, and considering all the neuroanatomical
and cognitive systems involved, this feat – performed daily by all sorts of
people – is wondrous.
iv) Attention: Although we are information-gathering creatures, it is evident
that under normal circumstances we are also highly selective in the amount
and type of information to which we attend. Our capacity to process
information seems to be limited to two levels – sensory and cognitive. If
too many sensory clues are imposed upon us at any given time, we can
become overloaded; if we try to process too many events in memory, we
can become overloaded, which may cause a breakdown in performance. All
of us have felt the same way at one time or another.
v) Consciousness: Consciousness is defined as “the current awareness, of
external or internal circumstances.” Rejected as being “unscientific” by the
behaviourists, the word consciousness and the concept it represents simply
did not fade away. For most people, consciousness and unconscious thoughts
(such as you might have on a first date) are very real. For example, when
you glance at your watch while studying and it reads “10:42 (
P.M.),” you are
conscious, or, aware, of that external signal. However, your reading of the
time also brings up another conscious thought, one that was initially activated
by reading the time but is from “inside.” That conscious thought might be,
“It’s getting late: I’d better finish this chapter and go to bed”. Consciousness
has gained new respectability recently and now is a concept studied seriously
in modern cognitive psychology.
vi) Memory: Memory and perception work together. The information available
to us comes from our perception, short-term memory, and long-term memory.
Most obvious long-term storage is the knowledge of the language. We draw
words from LTM and more or less use them correctly. In a fleeting second,
we are able to recall information about an event of years before. Such
information does not come from an immediate perceptual experience; it is
stored along with a vast number of other facts in the LTM.
vii) Representation of Knowledge: Fundamental of all human cognition is the
representation of knowledge: how information is symbolised and combined
with the things stored in the brain. This part of cognition has two aspects:
the conceptual representation of knowledge in mind and the way the brain
stores and process information. The conceptual representation in different
individuals can be considerably different. In spite of these inherent
dissimilarities between representations of knowledge, most humans do
experience and depict experience in similar enough ways to get along well
in the world. The content of this information is also hugely different. But
our neurological web entraps information and experiences and holds them
in structures that are similar in all human brains.

===== PAGE 7 =====
11
Cognitive Psychologyviii)Imagery: Cognitive psychologists are especially interested in the topic of
internal representations of knowledge. The mental images of the environment
are formed in the form of a cognitive map, a type of internal representation
of the juxtaposed buildings, streets, street signs, spotlights, and so on. From
the cognitive maps, we are able to draw out significant cues. Although the
experimental study of mental imagery is relatively new to psychology, some
significant research has recently been reported.
ix) Language: One form of knowledge shared by all human societies is the
knowledge of language. Language is the principal means by which we acquire
and express knowledge; thus, the study of how language is used is a central
concern of cognitive psychology. Human language development represents
a unique kind of abstraction, which is basic to cognition. Language processing
is an important component of information processing and storage. Language
also influences perception, a fundamental aspect of cognition.
x) Developmental Psychology: Developmental psychology is another important
area of cognitive psychology that has been intensely studied. Recent studies
and theories in developmental cognitive psychology have greatly expanded
our understanding of how cognitive structures develop. As adults, we have
all lived through childhood and adolescence and we share maturational
experiences with all members of our species.
xi) Thinking and Concept Formation: Thinking is the crown jewel of cognition.
Thinking is the process by which a new mental representation is formed
through the transformation of information. Advances in cognitive psychology
have led to a formidable arsenal of research techniques and theoretical
models.  An ability to think and form concepts is an important aspect of
cognition. Similar concepts help in the understanding and processing of
information. There is a considerable body of knowledge about the laws and
processes of concept formation.
xii) Human and Artificial Intelligence: Human intelligence includes the ability
to acquire, recall, and use knowledge to understand concrete and abstract
concepts and the relationships among objects and ideas, to understand a
language, to follow instructions, to convert verbal descriptions into actions,
and to behave according to the rules, and to use knowledge in a meaningful
way.
The specialty within the computer science called artificial intelligence has had a
major influence on the development of cognitive science, especially since the
design of programs requires knowledge of how we process information. Cognitive
psychology also addresses to find out whether a perfect robot can simulate human
behaviour.
1.5 A BRIEF HISTORY OF COGNITIVE
PSYCHOLOGY
As we have learned, a great portion of cognitive psychology deals with how
knowledge is represented in the mind. In this section on the history of cognitive
psychology we will review three major periods (for a detailed history see Solso
& MacLin, 2000; Wilson & Keil, 1999). First, we will deal with traditional ideas

===== PAGE 8 =====
12
Information Processing from a very early period. Then we touch on the way knowledge and thinking was
conceptualised by Renaissance scholars. Finally, we will deal with the modern
period with emphasis on current ideas and methods.
1.5.1 Early Thoughts on Thinking
Where did knowledge come from, and how is it represented in the mind? That
eternal question is fundamental to cognitive psychology as it has been through
the ages of humankind. Basically, two answers have been proposed. The
empiricists maintain that knowledge comes from experience, and the nativists
suggest that knowledge is based on innate characteristics of the brain. From a
scientific perspective, neither case can be definitively proved, so the argument
continues without clear resolution. With these issues clearly before us, let’s
consider the way ancient philosophers and early psychologists grappled with the
issue. The fascination with knowledge can be traced to the earliest writings.
Early theories were concerned with the seat of thought and memory. Ancient
Egyptian hieroglyphics suggest their authors believed that knowledge was
localised in the heart—a view shared by the early Greek philosopher Aristotle
but not by Plato, who held that the brain was the locus of knowledge.
1.5.2 Cognition in the Renaissance and Beyond
Renaissance philosophers and theologians seemed generally satisfied that
knowledge was located in the brain. They considered that knowledge was acquired
not only through the physical senses ( mundus sensibilis – touch, taste, smell,
vision, and hearing) but also from divine sources (mundus intellectualis—Deus) .
During the eighteenth century, when philosophic psychology was brought to the
point where , scientific psychology could assume a role, the British empiricists,
George Berkeley, David Hume, and, later, James Mill and his son John Stuart
Mill suggested that internal representation is of three types: (1) direct sensory
events, (2) faint copies of percepts, or those that are stored in memory; and (3)
transformation of these faint copies, as in associated thought. These notions are
the basis of much current research in cognitive psychology.
During the nineteenth century, the early psychologists like Gustav Fechner, Franz
Brentano, Hermann Helmholtz, Wilhelm Wundt, G; E. Muller, Oswald Kulpe,
Hermann Ebbinghaus, Sir Francis Galton, Edward Titchener, and William James
and others started to break away from philosophy to form a discipline based on
empirical results rather than on speculation. By the last half of the nineteenth
century, theories of the representation of knowledge were clearly dichotomous:
that emphasised the structure of mental representation (Wundt, Titchner); and
the processes or acts (Brentano).
About the same time in America, James critically analysed the new psychology
that was developing in Germany. He established the first’ psychological laboratory
in America, wrote the definitive work in psychology in 1890 (Principles of
Psychology), and developed a well-reasoned model of the mind. Perhaps James’s
most direct link with modem cognitive psychology is in his view of memory, in
which both structure and process play an important role. F. C. Donders and James
Cattell, contemporaries of James’s, performed experiments using the perception
of brief visual displays as a means of determining the time required for mental
operations. The technique, subject matter, procedures, and even the interpretation

===== PAGE 9 =====
13
Cognitive Psychologyof results of these early scientists seem to have anticipated the emergence of the
cognitive psychology a half-century later.
1.5.3 Cognitive Psychology in Early Twentieth Century
The representation of knowledge took a radical turn with the advent of twentieth-
century behaviourism and Gestalt psychology. The behaviourist views of human
and animal psychology were cast in a framework of stimulus-response (S-R)
psychology, and Gestalt theorists built elaborate conceptualisations of internal
representation within the context of isomorphism – one-to-one relationship
between representation and reality.
Psychological studies of mental processes as conceptualised in the late nineteenth
century suddenly became unfashionable, displaced by behaviourism. Studies of
internal mental operations and structures such as attention, consciousness,
memory, and thinking were laid to rest and remained so for about fifty years. To
the behaviourists, internal states were subsumed under the label of “intervening
variable,” that mediated the effects of stimuli on responses and were neglected
in favor of making observations on behaviour rather than on the mental processes.
In 1932, some years before the cognitive revolution swept across psychology,
learning psychologist Edward Tolman from the University of California at
Berkeley published Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men.  In this seminal
work, Tolman observed that what rats learn in a maze is the layout of the land
rather than simply a series of S-R connections. The animal, according to Tolman’s
interpretation, gradually developed a “picture” of his environment that was later
used to find the goal. This picture was called a cognitive map. Tolman’s postulate
about cognitive maps in animals did anticipate the contemporary preoccupation
with how knowledge is represented in a cognitive structure.
Also in 1932 Sir Frederick Bartlett from Cambridge University wrote
Remembering in which he rejected the then popular view that memory and
forgetting can be studied by means of nonsense syllables, as had been advocated
by Ebbinghaus in Germany during the previous century. In the study of human
memory, Bartlett argued, the use of rich and meaningful material under naturalistic
conditions would yield far more significant conclusions. Bartlett introduced the
concept of schema as a unifying theme that describes the essence of an experience.
Schema theory plays a central role in modern theories of memory. The fecund
ideas of Tolman in America and Bartlett in England highly influenced the thinking
of future cognitive psychologists.
1.5.4 Cognitive Psychology—As it is Today
In the 1950s interest again began to focus on attention, memory, pattern
recognition, images, semantic organisation, language processes, thinking, and
even consciousness (the most dogmatically eschewed concept), as well as other
“cognitive” topics once considered outside the boundary of experimental
psychology (vis-à-vis.behaviourism). New journals and professional groups were
founded as psychologists began more and more to turn to cognitive psychology.
As cognitive psychology became established with even greater clarity, it was
plain that this was a brand of psychology different from that in vogue during the
1930s and 1940s. Among the most important forces accounting for this
neocognitive revolution were the following:

===== PAGE 10 =====
14
Information Processing The “failure” of behaviourism.  Behaviorism, which generally studied overt
responses to stimuli, failed to account for the diversity of human behaviour as in
the case of language. Furthermore, there were some topics ignored by the
behaviourists that seemed to be profoundly related to human psychology. These
included memory, attention, consciousness, thinking, and imagery. It was apparent
that internal mental processes were very real parts of psychology and required
investigation.
The emergence of communication theory.  Communication theory prompted
experiments in signal detection, attention, cybernetics, and information theory –
areas of significance to cognitive psychology.
Modem linguistics. New ways of viewing language and grammatical structure
became incorporated into attitudes concerning cognitions.
Memory research. Research in verbal learning and semantic organisation provided
a sturdy empirical base for theories of memory, which led to the development of
models of memory systems and the appearance of testable models of other
cognitive processes.
Computer science and other technological advances.  Computer science, and
especially a subdivision of it—artificial intelligence—caused reexamination of
basic postulates of problem solving and memory processing and storage, as well
as of ‘language processing and acquisition. Research capabilities were greatly
expanded by new experimental devices.
Cognitive development.  Psychologists interested in development psychology
discovered an orderly unfolding of abilities with maturation. Notable among
developmental psychologists during this period was Jean Piaget, who described
how children develop an appreciation for concepts from infancy to adolescence.
Such progress of abilities seems to be natural.
From the earliest concepts of representational knowledge to recent research,
knowledge has been thought to rely heavily on sensory inputs. That theme runs
from the Greek philosophers, through Renaissance scholars, to contemporary
cognitive psychologists. But are internal representations of the world identical
to the physical properties of the world? Evidence is increasing that many internal
representations of reality are not the same as the external reality—that is, they
are not isomorphic. Tolman’s work with laboratory animals and Bartlett’s work
with human subjects suggest that information from the senses is stored as an
abstract representation. Furthermore, studies of neurology clearly show that
information from the outside world is sensed and stored as in a neurochemical
code.
1.6 KEY ISSUES IN THE STUDY OF COGNITIVE
PSYCHOLOGY
If the important ideas are reviewed, it is observed that some major themes underlie
all of cognitive psychology. Some of these issues are discussed dialectically here:
Nature versus Nurture – Which is more influential in human cognition – nature
or nurture? If we believe that innate characteristics of human cognition are more

===== PAGE 11 =====
15
Cognitive Psychologyimportant, we might focus our research on studying innate characteristics of
cognition. If we believe that the environment plays an important role in cognition,
we might conduct research exploring how distinctive characteristics of
environment seem to influence cognition.
Rationalism versus Empiricism  – How should we discover the truth about
ourselves and about the world around us? Should we do so by trying to reason
logically, based on what we already know? Or should we do so by observing and
testing our observations of what we can perceive through our senses? And how
can we combine theory with empirical methods to learn the most we can about
cognitive phenomena?
Structures versus Processes - Should we study the structures (contents, attributes,
and products) of the human mind? Or should we focus on processes of human
thinking?
Domain generality versus Domain specificity  – Are the processes we observe
limited to single domains, or are they general across a variety of domains? Do
observations in one domain apply also to all domains, or do they apply only to
specific domains observed?
V alidity of causal inferences versus Ecological validity  – Should we study
cognition by using highly controlled experiments that increase the probability of
valid inferences regarding causality? Or should we use more naturalistic
techniques?
Applied versus Basic research – Should we conduct research into fundamental
cognitive processes? Or should we study ways in which to help people use
cognition effectively in practical situations?
Biological versus Behavioural methods  – Should we study the brain and its
functions directly, perhaps even scanning the brain while people are performing
cognitive tasks? Or should we study people’s behaviour in cognitive tasks, looking
at measures such as percentage correct and reaction time?
Note that these questions can be posed in the “either/or” form of thesis/antithesis,
or in the both/and form of a synthesis of views or methods, which often proves
more useful than one extreme position or another.
1.7 KEY IDEAS IN COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
Certain key ideas seem to keep emerging in cognitive psychology, regardless of
the particular phenomenon one studies. Here are what might be considered the
five major ideas:
Data in cognitive psychology can be fully understood only in the context of an
explanatory theory, but theories are empty without empirical data.
Cognition is generally adaptive but not in all specific instances.
Cognitive processes interact with each other and with noncognitive processes.
Cognition needs to be studied through a variety of scientific methods.
All basic research in cognitive psychology may lead to applications, and all applied
research may lead to basic understandings.

===== PAGE 12 =====
16
Information Processing
Activity: Think about some of the fields of cognitive psychology to which
these key themes and issues may apply.
1.7.1 Computer Metaphor and Human Cognition
Although Pascal, Descartes, and others dreamt of computing machines centuries
ago, it was not until the development of high-speed digital computers  more than
fifty years ago that practical machines were invented. These machines gained
enormous acceptance and are presently used in virtually every aspect of modern
life. Originally, such devices were thought to be wonderful number crunchers
capable of performing a multitude of complex mathematical operations in a
fraction of the time required by humans. However, it was quickly discovered
that they could perform functions that resembled human problem solving.
However, what computers do well (perform high-speed mathematical functions
and abide by rule-governed logic) humans do poorly, relatively speaking. And
what humans do well (form generalisations, make inferences, understand complex
patterns, and have emotions) computers do poorly, or not at all. Despite this
problem, a second generation of cognitive-computer scientists is working toward
building computers that looked something like a brain.
These new computers are sometimes called neural networks and act more like
humans than the earlier versions. They are able to make generalisations and
understand complex visual patterns, are slow at math, and make witless mistakes.
Although they still do not have emotions, they are nevertheless a mark of success.
We now know that there are fundamental differences between the internal
workings of computers and the internal workings of the brain. Nevertheless, the
computer metaphor continues to have a profound and generally positive impact
on the development of cognitive psychology.
1.7.2 Cognitive Science
Three powerful areas of scientific development, namely, computer science,
neuroscience, and cognitive psychology, converge to create a new science called
cognitive science. The boundaries between these disciplines are sometimes hard
to distinguish, that is, some cognitive psychologists may be closer to neuroscience,
others to computer science. One thing is clear, that is the science of human
cognition is undergoing a radical transformation as a result of major changes in
computer technology and brain science. Cognitive psychology makes full use of
recent discoveries in neuroscience and computer science that illuminate the
cognitive properties of the human species.
1.7.3 Neuroscience and Cognitive Psychology
During the early stages of cognitive psychology, little attention was given to
physiological psychology or neuroanatomy. Much of the early information on
the brain and its functions resulted from head traumas incurred during wars and
accidents. The central issue neurologists struggled with was whether the brain
was a holistic organ, with operations distributed throughout its infrastructure, or
whether activities were localised and tied to specific regions. For example, did
learning a specific act take place in a localised area of the brain, or was learning
distributed throughout many parts of the brain? Among the most prominent of
the scientists who wrestled with these issues was Karl Lashley (1929). Recently,

===== PAGE 13 =====
17
Cognitive Psychologyprogress has been made in the field of neuroscience, which comprises both the
structural aspects of the brain and its peripheral components, as well as the
functional aspects.
With the beginning of the twenty-first century, cognitive psychology seems poised
to make another paradigm shift. While the traditional topics of perception,
memory, language, problem solving, and thinking and the method of experimental
analysis are still central to the cognitive theme.  As is well known, the use of
neuro cognitive imagery promises to become one of the major means of
investigating cognitive functions in this century.
Neuro cognitive techniques, which have been developing very rapidly in the
past several decades, allow us to see deeper and more clearly into the brain—
and the brain is believed to be the engine of cognition. Virtually every area of
cognition has been investigated with neuro cognitive techniques. These,
techniques, MRI, PET, EEG
 , and the like, show not only the structures of
cognition but also the processes involved. And, in many instance, the results
have been remarkable. While this trend is likely to continue and grow, it is
important to recognise the central themes in cognition mentioned above.
1.8 LET US SUM UP
Cognitive psychology is the study of how people perceive, learn, remember, and
think about information. A cognitive psychologist might study how people
perceive various shapes, why they remember some facts but forget others, or
how they learn language.
Cognitive psychology is interested in what is generally called mental phenomena.
In this sense, cognitive psychology IS the scientific study of the mind. Then we
took up the various research methods that we use in cognitive psychology.  Every
research has a goal and it is achieved through appropriate methodology.  It was
noted that the goals of research in cognitive psychology was to find the how and
why of thinking. It was pointed out that there are distinctive research methods in
cognitive psychology.  Each method has distinctive advantages and disadvantages.
It was also noted that Cognitive psychologists often broaden and deepen their
understanding of cognition through research in cognitive science. Cognitive
science is a cross-disciplinary field that uses ideas and methods from cognitive
psychology, psychobiology, artificial intelligence, philosophy, linguistics, and
anthropology.
Modern cognitive psychology freely, draws theories and techniques; from twelve
principal areas of research, namely cognitive neurosiceince, human and artificial
intelligence, perception, thinking and concept formation, pattern recognition,
developmental psychology, attention, language, representation of knowledge,
imagery, memory and consciousness.  Then we dealt with a brief history of
cognitive psychology and highlighted the early thoughts on thinking, renaissance
and beyond and the status of cognitive psychology as of today. We then discussed
some of the key issues in cognitive psychology highlighting nature vs. nurture,
rationalism vs. empiricism, structure vs. processes etc.

===== PAGE 14 =====
18
Information Processing
1.9 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Describe the major historical schools of psychological thought leading up
to the development of cognitive psychology.
2) Analyse how various research methods in cognitive psychology reflect
empirist and rationalist approaches to gaining knowledge.
3) Design a rough sketch of a cognitive-psychological investigation involving
one of the research methods described in this chapter. Highlight both the
advantages and disadvantages of using this particular method for your
investigation.
4) Describe Cognitive Psychology as it is today. How might you speculate that
the field will change in the next 50 years?
5) How might an insight gained from basic research lead to practical use in an
everyday setting?
6) Describe some real life situations related to different domains of cognitive
psychology.
7) How might an insight gained from applied research lead to deepened
understanding of fundamental features of cognition?
8) What was the importance of the computer to the development of cognitive
psychology?
9) Next time you visit a supermarket or mall, pause for a few moments and
observe the various examples of cognitive psychology which surround you.
Pay particular attention to: 1) the use of forms and colours to gain attention,
2) your own reaction to environmental cues, 3) the use of memory in
understanding language, context, and the interpretation of the sights and
sounds of your environment. Note down your impressions of these matters
and read them over in about a week. What principles discussed in this chapter
apply?
1.10  SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Galotti, K.M. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Perception, Attention, and Memory.
London: Cengage.
Goldstein, E. H. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Connecting Mind, Research and
Everyday Experience. London: Thomson Learning.
References
Hunt, R. R., & Ellis, H.C. (2006). Fundamentals of Cognitive Psychology. New
Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill.
Kellogg, R.T. (2007). Cognitive Psychology. London: Sage Publications.
Reed, S.K. (2010). Cognition: Theories and Applications. London: Cengage.
Solso, R.L. (2006). Cognitive Psychology. New Delhi: Pearson Education.
Sternberg, R.J. (2009). Applied Cognitive Psychology: Perceiving, Learning,
and Remembering. London: Cengage.

===== PAGE 15 =====
19
Cognitive Psychology
UNIT 2 INFORMATION PROCESSING IN
LEARNING AND MEMORY
“The mechanisms of learning and memory are at the essence of how the brain
works.”
— Brown
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Objectives
2.2 Learning and Memory
2.3 Cognitive Information Processing
2.3.1 Principles of the Information Processing
2.4 Information Processing in Learning and Memory
2.4.1 Cognitive Information Processing Model of Learning
2.4.2 Development of Memory and Information Processing
2.5 Theories of Information Processing
2.5.1 Designing Instruction that Incorporate Best Practices for Information Processing
2.5.2 Bloom’s T axonomy of Cognitive Domain
2.5.3  Sternberg’s Information Processing Approach
2.6 Let Us Sum Up
2.7 Unit End Questions
2.8 Suggested Readings and References
2.0 INTRODUCTION
One of the most fascinating and mysterious properties of the brain is its capacity
to learn, or its ability to change in response to experience and to retain that
knowledge throughout an organism’s lifetime. The ability to learn and to establish
new memories is fundamental to our very existence; we rely on memory to engage
in effective actions, to understand the words we read, to recognise the objects we
see, to decode the auditory signals representing speech, and even to provide us
with a personal identity and sense of self. Memory plays such an important and
ubiquitous role that it is often taken for granted—the only time most people pay
attention to their memory is when it fails, as too often happens through brain
injury or disease.
2.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Define the concept of learning and memory;
• Explain types of memory;
• Explain cognitive information processing; and
• Explain the theories of information processing.

===== PAGE 16 =====
20
Information Processing
2.2 LEARNING AND MEMORY
Learning is acquiring new knowledge, behaviours, skills, values, preferences or
understanding, and may involve synthesising and processing different types of
information. Benjamin Bloom (1965) has suggested three domains of learning
1) Cognitive  – to recall, calculate, discuss, analyse, problem solve, etc.;
psychomotor – to dance, swim, ski, dive, drive a car, ride a bike, etc.; and
affective – to like something or someone, love, appreciate, fear, hate, worship,
etc. These domains are not mutually exclusive. For example, in learning to
play chess, the person will have to learn the rules of the game (cognitive
domain); but he also has to learn how to set up the chess pieces on the
chessboard and also how to properly hold and move a chess piece
(psychomotor). Furthermore, later in the game the person may even learn to
love the game itself, value its applications in life, and appreciate its history
(affective domain).
2) Memory is usually divided into three storage systems: sensory, short-term,
and long-term.
i) Sensory Memory - Sensory memory is affiliated with the transduction
of energy (change from one form of energy to another). The environment
makes available a variety of sources of information (light, sound, smell,
heat, cold, etc.), but the brain only understands electrical stimulation.
The body has special sensory receptor cells that transduce this external
energy to something the brain can understand. In the process of
transduction, a memory is created. This memory is very short (less
than 1/2 second for vision; about 3 seconds for hearing).
The sensory memory retains an exact copy of what is seen or heard
(visual and auditory). It is absolutely critical that the learner attend to
the information at this initial stage in order to transfer it to the next
one. There are two major concepts for getting information into STM:
first, individuals are more likely to pay attention to a stimulus if it has
an interesting feature. Second, individuals are more likely to pay
attention if the stimulus activates a known pattern.
ii) Short-Term Memory (STM) - After entering sensory memory, a limited
amount of information is transferred into short-term memory. Selective
attention determines what information moves from sensory memory to
short-term memory. STM is most often stored as sounds, especially in
recalling words, but may be stored as images. It works basically the
same as a computer’s RAM (Random Access Memory) in that it
provides a working space for short computations and then transfers it
to other parts of the memory system or discards it. STM is vulnerable
to interruption or interference. STM is characterised by:
A limited capacity of up to seven pieces of independent information
(Miller,1956).
The brief duration of these items last from 3 to 20 seconds.
Decay appears to be the primary mechanism of memory loss.

===== PAGE 17 =====
21
Information Processing in
Learning and Memory
Miller’s Magic Number - George Miller’s classic 1956 study found
that the amount of information which can be remembered on one
exposure is between five and nine items, depending on the information.
Applying a range of +2 or -2, the number 7 became known as Miller’ s
Magic Number, the number of items which can be held in Short-Term
Memory at any one time. Miller himself stated that his magic number
was for items with one aspect. His work is based on subjects listening
to a number of auditory tones that varied only in pitch. Each tone was
presented separately, and the subject was asked to identify each tone
relative to the others s/he had already heard, by assigning it a number.
After about five or six tones, subjects began to get confused, and their
capacity for making further tone judgments broke down. He found this
to be true of a number of other tasks. But if more aspects are included,
then we can remember more, depending upon our familiarity and the
complexity of the subject (in Miller’s research, there was only one
aspect — the tone). For example, we can remember way more human
faces as there are a number of aspects, such as hair color, hair style,
shape of face, facial hair, etc. We remember phone numbers by their
aspects of 2 or more groupings, i.e. chunking. We don’t really remember
“seven” numbers. We remember the first group of three and then the
other grouping of four numbers. If it is long distance, then we add an
area code. So we actually remember 10 numbers by breaking it into
groups of three.
Within STM, there are three basic operations:
Iconic memory - The ability to hold visual images.
Acoustic memory - The ability to hold sounds. Acoustic memory can
be held longer than iconic memory.
Working memory - Short-term memory is also called working memory
and relates to what we are thinking about at any given moment in time.
In Freudian terms, this is conscious memory. It is created by our paying
attention to an external stimulus, an internal thought, or both. An active
process to keep it until it is put to use (think of a phone number you’ll
repeat to yourself until you can dial it on the phone). Note that the goal
is not really to move the information from STM to LTM, but merely
put the information to immediate use.
iii) Long-Term Memory (LTM) -  This is relatively permanent storage.
Information is stored on the basis of meaning and importance. The
process of transferring information from STM to LTM involves the
encoding or consolidation of information. This is not a function of
time, that is, the longer a memory stayed in STM, the more likely it
was to be placed into LTM; but on organising complex information in
STM before it can be encoded into LTM. In this process of organisation,
the meaningfulness or emotional content of an item may play a greater
role in its retention into LTM. We must find ways to make learning
relevant and meaningful enough for the learner to make the important
transfer of information to long-term memory.
Also, on a more concrete level, the use of chunking has been proven to be a
significant aid for enhancing the STM transfer to LTM. Remember, STM’s

===== PAGE 18 =====
22
Information Processing capacity is limited to about seven items, regardless of the complexity of those
items. Chunking allows the brain to automatically group certain items together,
hence the ability to remember and learn better.
The knowledge we store in LTM affects our perceptions of the world, and
influences what information in the environment we attend to. LTM provides the
framework to which we attach new knowledge. It contrasts with short-term and
perceptual memory in that information can be stored for extended periods of
time and the limits of its capacity are not known.
Schemas are mental models of the world. Information in LTM is stored in
interrelated networks of these schemas. These, in turn, form intricate knowledge
structures. Related schemas are linked together, and information that activates
one schema also activates others that are closely linked. This is how we recall
relevant knowledge when similar information is presented. These schemas guide
us by diverting our attention to relevant information and allow us to disregard
what is not important.
Since LTM storage is organised into schemas, instructional designers should
activating existing schemas before presenting new information can be helpful in
processing of the new information. This can be done in a variety of ways, including
graphic organisers, curiosity-arousing questions, movies, etc.
LTM also has a strong influence on perception through top-down processing -
our prior knowledge affects how we perceive sensory information. Our
expectations regarding a particular sensory experience influence how we interpret
it. This is how we develop bias. Also, most optical illusions take advantage of
this fact. An important factor for retention of learned information in LTM is
rehearsal that provides transfer of learning.
2.3 COGNITIVE INFORMATION PROCESSING
Information processing is the change (processing) of information in any manner
detectable by an observer. Within the field of cognitive psychology, information
processing is an approach to the goal of understanding human thinking. It began
in the 1940s and 1950s. Educators are very interested in the study of how humans
learn. This is because how one learns, acquires new information, and retains
previous information guides selection of long-term learning objectives and
methods of effective instruction. To this end, cognition as a psychological area
of study goes far beyond simply the taking in and retrieving information. It is a
broad field dedicated to the study of the mind holistically. Neisser (1967), one of
the most influential researchers in cognition, defined it as the study of how people
encode, structure, store, retrieve, use or otherwise learn knowledge. Cognitive
psychologists hypothesise an intervening variable or set of variables between
environment and behaviour—which contrasts it with behavioural theories.
2.3.1 Principles of the Information Processing
Even though there are widely varying views within cognitive psychology, there
is general agreement among most cognitive psychologists on some basic principles
of the information processing system (Huitt, 2000).

===== PAGE 19 =====
23
Information Processing in
Learning and Memory
The first is the assumption of a limited capacity of the mental system. This means
that the amount of information that can be processed by the system is constrained
in some very important ways. Bottlenecks, or restrictions in the flow and
processing of information, occur at very specific points (e.g., Broadbent, 1975;
Case, 1978).
A second principle is that a control mechanism is required to oversee the encoding,
transformation, processing, storage, retrieval and utilisation of information (e.g.,
Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1971). That is, not all of the processing capacity of the
system is available; an executive function that oversees this process will use up
some of this capability. When one is learning a new task or is confronted with a
new environment, the executive function requires more processing power than
when one is doing a routine task or is in a familiar environment.
A third principle is that there is a two-way flow of information as we try to make
sense of the world around us. We constantly use information that we gather
through the senses (often referred to as bottom-up processing) and information
we have stored in memory (often called top-down processing) in a dynamic
process as we construct meaning about our environment and our relations to it.
This is somewhat analogous to the difference between inductive reasoning (going
from specific instances to a general conclusion) and deductive reasoning (going
from a general principle to specific examples.) A similar distinction can be made
between using information we derive from the senses and that generated by our
imaginations.
A fourth principle generally accepted by cognitive psychologists is that the human
organism has been genetically prepared to process and organise information in
specific ways. For example, a human infant is more likely to look at a human
face than any other stimulus. Other research has discovered additional biological
predispositions to process information. For example, language development is
similar in all human infants regardless of language spoken by adults or the area
in which they live (e.g., rural versus urban, Asia versus Europe.) All human
infants with normal hearing babble and coo, generate first words, begin the use
of telegraphic speech (example, ball gone), and overgeneralise (e.g., using “goed
to the store” when they learn the verbs) at approximately the same ages(Discussed
in detail in Block 3).
2.4 INFORMATION PROCESSING IN LEARNING
AND MEMORY
One of the primary areas of cognition studied by researches is memory. There
are many hypotheses and suggestions as to how this integration occurs, and many
new theories have built upon established beliefs in this area. Currently, there is
widespread consensus on several aspects of information processing; however,
there are many dissentions in reference to specifics on how the brain actually
codes or manipulates information as it is stored in memory.
Schacter and Tulving (as cited in Driscoll, 2001) state that “a memory system is
defined in terms of its brain mechanisms, the kind of information it processes,
and the principles of its operation”. This suggests that memory is the combined
total of all mental experiences. In this light, memory is a built store that must be
accessed in some way in order for effective recall or retrieval to occur. It is

===== PAGE 20 =====
24
Information Processing premised on the belief that memory is a multi-faceted, if not multi-staged, system
of connections and representations that encompass a lifetime’s accumulation of
perceptions.
Eliasmith (2001) defines memory as the “general ability, or faculty that enables
us to interpret the perceptual world to help organise responses to changes that
take place in the world”. It is implied by this definition that there must be a
tangible structure in which to incorporate new stimuli into memory. The form of
this structure has been the source of much debate, and there seems to be no
absolute agreement on what shape a memory structure actually takes, but there
are many theories on what constitutes both the memory structure and the
knowledge unit.
Winn and Snyder (2001) attribute the idea that memory is organised into structures
to the work of Sir Frederick Charles Bartlett. Bartlett’s work established two
consistent patterns regarding recall. First, memory is inaccurate. His second
finding, though, brought about somewhat of a revolution in traditional thinking
about memory. Bartlett suggested that the inaccuracy of memory is systematic.
A systematic difference makes allowable the scientific study of inaccuracy, and
this suggestion led to an entirely new mode of thought on memory. What
accounted for systematic inaccuracies in memory were the intervening influences
of previous information and the experiences of the person. This demonstrates
that knowledge units are not simply stored and then left alone, but that they are
retained, manipulated, and changed as new knowledge is acquired.
2.4.1 Cognitive Information Processing Model (CIP) of
Learning
Information theorists approach learning primarily through a study of memory.
The following Cognitive Information Processing model (CIP) of learning presents
a well-established paradigm of cognitive-behavioural psychology. The model
articulates the limited capacity of “working memory.” Working memory is tasked
with the burden of processing incoming information, transferring information to
long-term memory and retrieval of information from long-term memory. The
concept of “cognitive load” — the amount of work imposed on working memory
by a learning task — is based on observations of the functions of working memory.
Information processing in memory can be viewed from a computer model
perspective. Like the computer, the human mind takes in information, performs
operations on it to change its form and content, stores the information, retrieves
it when needed, and generates responses to it. Processing involves encoding
(gathering and representing information); storage (holding information); and
retrieval (getting the information when needed). The entire system is guided by
a control process that determines how and when information will flow through
the system. Some theorists suggest that the operation of the brain resembles a
large number of computers all operating at the same time (in parallel).
2.4.2 Development of Memory and Information Processing
As previously stated, cognition is the encoding, structuring, storing, retrieving,
using, or otherwise learning knowledge (Neisser, 1967). There are important
developmental aspects for each of these activities. According to Flavell et al.
(2002), from an information processing perspective some of the most important
are:

===== PAGE 21 =====
25
Information Processing in
Learning and Memory
• Brain changes brought about by biological maturation or experience;
• Increased processing capacity, speed, and efficiency as a result of both
maturation and knowledge development;
• Modifications of connections in a neural network;
• New emergent concepts arising from repeated self-organisation as a result
of adapting to the demands of a changing environment; and
• Increased capacity for problem-solving and metacognition.
Encoding - Encoding occurs during the initial processing of a stimulus or event.
Maturation and experience influence this process. In terms of maturation,
Dempster (1981) suggests that the adult capacity for short-term memory of 5 + 2
digits might be as much as 2 digits lower for children aged 5 and 1 digit lower
for children aged 9. As for experience, in a series of well-known studies of
expertise, novices remember new information less well than experts (e.g., Chi,
1978; Schneider, Korkel, & Winert, 1989). One of the most important differences
between novices and experts is the structure and organisation of domain-specific
knowledge.
Structuring and Organising - Structuring and organising information occur as
the learner processes and stores information. The learner’s ability changes over
time as a result of both maturation and experience. When presented with
information they are asked to remember, younger children do not rehearse
information in order to remember it. As they get into school, they begin to develop
or are taught various strategies. At first these strategies are only used when
prompted by someone else, but as the child becomes more competent in their
use and uses them more frequently, the child will increasingly use the strategies
spontaneously (Flavell et al., 2002).
One of the most important information processing capacities a child develops is
the ability to organise information; this is, in turn, influenced by the child’s ability
to categorise. As is the case with other information-processing capacities, this
ability changes with both maturation and experience.
One of the basic types of categorisation is the grouping of specific events, ideas,
people, things, etc. into concepts. Rosch and his colleagues (e.g., Mervis & Rosch,
1981; Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976) demonstrated two
fundamental features to the development of concepts: the ease of identifying
similarities of members of the concept and distinguishing differences between
members that are not. For example, the development of the concept of animal
would be more difficult than developing the concept of dog or cat because it
would be easier to identify similarities among dogs or cats and differences between
cats and dogs than it would be to identify similarities among all animals or to
differentiate all animals from all plants.
This has important implications as we design learning activities for children and
youth that can help them develop their organisational and storage capacities.
Storage and Retrieval - How much information can be stored and retrieved
relative to a stimulus or event also changes over time. For example, prior to
about age 7 months an infant will not seek an object that has been shown and
then removed from view. The infant has encoded the object (such as a rattle) and

===== PAGE 22 =====
26
Information Processing will reach for it, but seems to lose interest as soon as it is no longer in view. At
about 7 months attains what is called “object permanence” and will begin to
seek the object if it is removed from view.
A series of studies by Bauer, Mandler and associates (as cited in Flavell et al.,
2002) demonstrates a child’s increasing ability to perform simple multiple-act
sequences. By age 13 months infants can reproduce three-act sequences; by age
24 months this has increased to five-act sequences; and by age 30 months to
eight separate actions. As children gain language skills, their ability to store and
recall more complex events increases. This is shown first in autobiographical
accounts of daily activities and then to events they may have witnessed or heard
about.
Flavell et al. (2002) made four observations about strategy development:
Strategy development is not linear. When developing any particular strategy,
development will often stall or even regress before it becomes systematically
and correctly used.
A strategy will continue to develop after it is first demonstrated in its mature
form. This continued development may take months or even years.
Children show considerable variability in their use of strategies. Children often
go back and forth in their use of strategies, changing strategies even after they
have been found to work well.
Children differ in their abilities to integrate different strategies into a coherent
pattern for successful learning. Children must be given ample opportunity to
create successful learning programs that work for them.
2.5 THEORIES OF INFORMATION PROCESSING
There are important theories which explain information processing.  Some of
the major theories are presented in the following section.
2.5.1 Designing Instruction that Incorporates Best Practices
for Information Processing
The understanding of how the mind processes and stores information is invaluable
to educators as they plan for instruction. If there is little to no understanding of
the information processing skills of the students with whom one is working, it
would be almost impossible to design instruction that contributes to high levels
of learning and achievement. However, attempting to understand the myriad
theories of information processing and cognitive development can be
overwhelming and contradictory. There are means of structuring instruction,
though that can incorporate the best of all of these ideas, and in order to help
students reach higher-level thinking and learning skills, educators must draw
from all of these theories.
If learning is to occur, educators must ensure that new information is processed
in such a way that it can be retained in long-term memory. In order to achieve
this, elaboration and connection must occur between previously learned memory
and new information. It has been established that the more deeply information is
processed and the more connections that can be made between new information
and existing memory structures, the more information will be retained in long-

===== PAGE 23 =====
27
Information Processing in
Learning and Memory
term memory. Therefore, in order to make new material meaningful, instruction
must be presented in such a way that students can easily access and connect
previous learning and experiences with the new material. One of the most often
cited references to levels of elaboration for instructional purposes is the Taxonomy
of the Cognitive Domain developed by Bloom and his colleagues (Bloom,
Englehart, Furst, Hill, & Krathwohl, 1956) and recently revised by Anderson
and Krathwohl (2000).
2.5.2 Bloom’s Taxonomy of Cognitive Domain
Bloom et al. (1965) proposed that information processing can be classified in
six levels, each more complex than the previous. The first level is labeled knowing
and simply requires a learner to repeat back what was heard or seen. This involves
very little elaboration. The second level is labeled comprehension and requires
some rudimentary levels of understanding that might involve having the student
summarize or paraphrase some information. Again, this requires only modest
levels of elaboration. The next two levels, application and analysis, involve
more elaboration and show a significant impact on long-term learning when
they are used during the learning process. Application involves using the concepts
or principles to solve a problem, while analysis involves understanding the
relationship among the parts and how they are organised into a whole. The last
two levels, synthesis and evaluation, are the most complex and require the highest
levels of elaboration. Synthesis involves putting the parts or components together
in an original manner, while evaluation is the process of making judgments based
on comparison to a standard.
Research has confirmed that the first four levels are indeed a hierarchy, while
there seems to be a problem with the ordering of the two highest levels (Hummel
& Huitt, 1994). Anderson and Krathwohl (2000) propose that the ordering is
reversed, with evaluation being less difficult than synthesis, while Huitt (2000)
proposes that they are both at the same level of difficulty though they incorporate
different types of processing. There seems to be consensus that both synthesis
and evaluation are based on analysis or the ability to compare and contrast parts
of a whole and understand the relationship among parts.
2.5.3 Sternberg’s Information Processing Approach
Another theorist firmly grounded in the information processing approach is
Sternberg (1988). Sternberg’s theory suggests that development is skills-based
and continuous rather than staged and discontinuous as stage theorists believe,
and his focus is on intelligence. This focus on intelligence separates his ideas
from stage theorists because it rejects the idea of incremental stages, but rather
suggests that development occurs in the same way throughout life differentiated
only by the expertise of the learner to process new information. First, and very
importantly, Sternberg’s model does not differentiate between child and adult
learning. Also, he deals solely with information processing aspects of development
and does not incorporate any facets of biological development into his theory.
Cognitive development is viewed as a novice to expert progression; as one
becomes better at interaction and learning, one is able to learn more and at higher
levels. Development changes as a result of feedback, self-monitoring, and
automatisation. In this theory, intelligence is comprised of three kinds of
information processing components: metacomponents, performance components,
and knowledge-acquisition components.

===== PAGE 24 =====
28
Information Processing In Sternberg’s (1988) model, each of these three components works together to
facilitate learning and cognitive development. Metacomponents are executive in
nature. They guide the planning and decision making in reference to problem
solving situations; they serve to identify the problem and connect it with
experiences from the past. There is, however, no action directly related to
metacomponents, they simply direct what actions will follow. Performance
components are the actions taken in the completion of a problem-solving task.
Performance components go beyond metacomponents in that they perform the
function also of weighing the merit and or consequences of actions in comparison
to other options rather than simply identifying options. Sternberg’s third proposed
type of intelligence is the knowledge-acquisition component. This type is
characterised by the ability to learn new information in order to solve a potential
problem. This type is much more abstract and may or may not be directly related
to a current problem-solving task (Driscoll, 2001). This three-leveled view of
intelligence comprises the componential aspect of Sternberg’s theory, but this is
only one of three parts to his larger triarchic theory of intelligence (Kearsley,
2001).
Sternberg’s (1988) theory adds the components of feedback to theories of
cognitive development; this suggests that an individual’s social interaction has
some impact on cognitive development. In fact, one of the three parts of his
theory is based on the context in which learning takes place; this subpart of the
theory “specifies that intelligent behaviour is defined by the sociocultural context
in which it takes place and involves adaptation to the environment, selection of
better environments, and shaping of the present environment” (Kearsley, 2001).
The addition of social context as a factor in cognitive development links Sternberg
to the interactional theories of development of Bruner (1977, 1986) and Vygotsky
(1978). These theories, and others of this type, are premised on the assumption
that learning does not occur in a vacuum. Therefore, one must discuss the social
and cultural contexts of learning. Driscoll (2001) says, “Of central importance is
viewing education as more than curriculum and instructional strategies. Rather,
one must consider the broader context in how culture shapes the mind and
provides the toolkit by which individuals construct worlds and their conceptions
of themselves and their powers”.
These theories all work under the assumption that new information can most
effectively be learned if the material can be matched to memory structures already
in place (Winn and Snyder, 2001). Most theories hold that the mind contains
some type of framework into which new information is placed. This structure is
multi-leveled and has varying degrees of specificity. New information can be
matched with, compared to, contrasted to, joined with, or modified to fit with
existing structures. This in-place structural system allows for differing levels of
complexity of information processing. The formation of and continual building
of these structures, then, is critical in order for learners to process information in
various ways and at higher levels.
2.6 LET US SUM UP
One of the most fascinating and mysterious properties of the brain is its capacity
to learn, or its ability to change in response to experience and to retain that
knowledge throughout an organism’s lifetime. The ability to learn and to establish
new memories is fundamental to our very existence; we rely on memory to engage

===== PAGE 25 =====
29
Information Processing in
Learning and Memory
in effective actions, to understand the words we read, to recognise the objects we
see, to decode the auditory signals representing speech, and even to provide us
with a personal identity and sense of self.
Learning is acquiring new knowledge, behaviours, skills, values, preferences or
understanding, and may involve synthesising and processing different types of
information.
Memory is usually divided into three storage systems: sensory, short-term, and
long-term.
We then discussed Miller’s Magic number. We pointed out how within STM,
there are 3 basic operations, viz., iconic memory, acoustic memory and working
memory. Long Term Memory has been then presented which includes schemas
etc. Then the principles of information processing was taken up and and
highlighted the limited capacity of the mental system and secondlhy the control
mechanism is required to oversee the encoding, transformation, processing storage
etc.
Then we dealt with information processing in learning and memory.  It was
pointed out that from  an information processing perspective some of the most
important aspects include
• Brain changes brought about by biological maturation or experience;
• Increased processing capacity, speed, and efficiency as a result of both
maturation and knowledge development;
• Modifications of connections in a neural network;
• New emergent concepts arising from repeated self-organisation as a result
of adapting to the demands of a changing environment; and
• Increased capacity for problem-solving and metacognition.
Then we discussed about encoding which involves structuring, organising,
storage, retrieval etc. This was followed by theories of informationprocessing
which highlighted Bloom’s Taxonomy and  Sternberg’s information processing
theory.  It was  pointed out that that new information can most effectively be
learned if the material can be matched to memory structures already in place.
Most theories hold that the mind contains some type of framework into which
new information is placed. This structure is multi-leveled and has varying degrees
of specificity. New information can be matched with, compared to, contrasted
to, joined with, or modified to fit with existing structures.
2.7 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Describe two characteristics each of sensory memory, short term memory,
and long term memory.
2) Discuss the information processing approaches of learning and memory.
3) How would you design a study program to process the information so that it
can be retained in long term memory?
4) Describe the development of memory with reference to information
processing.

===== PAGE 26 =====
30
Information Processing 4) How would your life be different if you could greatly enhance your memory
skills?
5) What are the basic principles of information processing?
6) What are the three things you have learned about memory that can help you
learn new information so that you can effectively recall the information
over the long-term?
2.8 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Atkinson, R., & Shiffrin, R. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its
control processes. In K Spence & J Spence (Eds.). The Psychology of Learning
and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory (V ol. 2). New York: Academic
Press.
Bransford, J. (1979). Human Cognition: Learning, Understanding, and
Remembering. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
References
Cunia, E. (2005). Cognitive learning theory. Principles of Instruction and
Learning: A Web Quest. Retrieved April 2006, from http://suedstudent.syr.edu/
~ebarrett/ide621/cognitive.htm
Galotti, K.M. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Perception, Attention, and Memory.
London: Cengage.
Goldstein, E. H. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Connecting Mind, Research and
Everyday Experience. London: Thomson Learning.
http://www.well.com/user/smalin/miller.html]
Hunt, R. R., & Ellis, H.C. (2006). Fundamentals of Cognitive Psychology. New
Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill.
Miller, G . A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits
on our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
[Available online from Classics in the History of Psychology:
Solso, R.L. (2006). Cognitive Psychology. New Delhi: Pearson Education.
Sternberg, R.J. (2009). Applied Cognitive Psychology: Perceiving, Learning,
and Remembering. London: Cengage.
Stillings, N, Feinstein, M., Garfield, J., Rissland, E., Rosenbaum, D., Weisler,
S., & Baker-Ward, L. (1987). Cognitive Science: An Introduction. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

===== PAGE 27 =====
31
Information Processing in
Learning and MemoryUNIT 3 NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL BASIS OF
LEARNING AND MEMORY
 “It’ s a sense of flooding the brain too quickly. The brain has this disruption,
and the short-term memory isn’ t converting into long-term memory.”
                                                                               – John Hamilton
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Objectives
3.2 Memory and Brain
3.2.1 Human Memory, Brain Damage and Amnesia
3.2.2 Brain Surgery and Memory Loss
3.2.3 Amnesia and the Medial Temporal Lobe
3.3 Memory Consolidation and Hippocampus
3.4 Anterior and Lateral Temporal Lobes and  Memory
3.5 Animal Models of Memory
3.6 Imaging the Human Brain and Memory
3.61 Episodic Encoding and Retrieval
3.6.2 Semantic Encoding and Retrieval
3.6.3 Procedural Memory Encoding and Retrieval
3.6.4 Perceptual Priming and Implicit and Explicit Memory
3.7 Cellular Bases of Learning and Memory
3.8 Let Us Sum Up
3.9 Unit End Questions
3.10 Suggested Readings and References
3.0 INTRODUCTION
What is the relationship between learning and memory? Learning is the process
of acquiring new information, whereas memory refers to the persistence of
learning in a state that can be revealed at a later time (Squire, 1987). Learning,
then, has an outcome, and we refer to that as memory. To put it another way,
learning happens when a memory is created or is strengthened by repetition.
This need not involve the conscious attempt to learn. Learning can occur and
performance can improve simply from more exposure to information or to a
task. For example, we remember the details of a person’s face better by seeing it
more, without having to try to consciously memorize facial features.
Learning and memory can be subdivided into major hypothetical stages: encoding,
storage, and retrieval. Encoding refers to the processing of incoming information
to be stored. The encoding stage has two separate steps: acquisition and
consolidation. Acquisition registers inputs in sensory buffers and sensory analysis
stages, while consolidation creates a stronger representation over time. Storage,
the result of acquisition and consolidation, creates and maintains a permanent
record. Finally, retrieval utilises stored information to create a conscious
representation or to execute a learned behaviour like a motor act.

===== PAGE 28 =====
32
Information Processing We search for the neural correlates of learning and memory in many ways: a)
through case studies which reveal what is and is not lost in amnesia; b) by
developing animal models of memory in simple (invertebrates) and complex
systems (nonhuman primates); c) and with brain imaging to investigate normal
encoding, retrieval, and recall in healthy humans. In this chapter we will explore
all these methods in brief in order to understand the neural basis of learning and
memory.
3.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• Describe the process of memory in the brain;
• Define neurological issues related to memory;
• Define neuropsychological basis of learning and memory;
• Explain the neural processes of learning and memory.
3.2 MEMORY AND BRAIN
The field of the cognitive and experimental psychology of memory is rich with
theory and data and has produced a consistent set of concepts about the
organisation of human memory. The neuro scientific studies of memory are
important, both to understand how they have contributed to general theories of
memory, and to investigate how specific neural circuits and systems enable the
learning and retention of specific forms of knowledge.
3.2.1 Human Memory, Brain Damage and Amnesia
Deficits in memory as a function of brain damage, disease, or psychological
trauma are known as amnesia. Amnesia can involve either the inability to learn
new things or a loss of previous knowledge, or both. It can differentially affect
short-term/ working memory and long-term memory abilities. Thus, by examining
amnesia in conjunction with cognitive theories derived from experiments on
normal subjects, we can understand the organisation of memory at a functional
and a neural level. Much compelling information about the organisation of human
memory during amnesia was first derived from medical treatments that left
patients amnesic. The history is fascinating, and so let’s begin by turning back
the clock more than fifty years.
3.2.2 Brain Surgery and Memory Loss
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, surgeons attempted to treat neurological and
psychiatric disease using a variety of neurosurgical procedures, including
prefrontal lobotomy (removing or disconnecting the prefrontal lobe), corpus
callosotomy (surgically sectioning the corpus callosum), amygdalotomies
(removing the amygdala), and temporal lobe resection (removal of the temporal
lobe) (Figure 1.3.1). These surgical procedures opened a new window on human
brain function as they revealed, usually quite by accident, fundamentally important
principles of the organisation of human cognition. One surgical procedure relevant
to memory was removal of the medial portion of the temporal lobe, including
the hippocampal formation.

===== PAGE 29 =====
33
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory
In 1953 at a medical conference, the neurosurgeon William Beecher Scoville
from the Montreal Neurological Institute reported on bilateral removal of the
medial temporal lobe in one epileptic patient and several schizophrenic patients.
Shortly thereafter he wrote:
Bilateral resection of the uncus, and amygdalum alone, or in conjunction with
the entire pyriform amygdaloid hippocampal complex, has resulted in no marked
physiologic or behavioural changes with the one exception of a very grave, recent
memory loss, so severe as to prevent the patient from remembering the locations
of the rooms in which he lives, the names of his close associates, or even the way
to the toilet.... (Scoville, 1954).
Scoville and psychologist Brenda Milner did the neuropsychological examination
of ten patients. Milner found that memory impairments in the patients having
medial temporal lobe resections as part of their treatment were in relation to how
much of the medial temporal lobe was removed. The farther posterior along the
medial temporal lobe the resection was, the worse the amnesia. Strikingly,
however, only bilateral resection of the hippocampus resulted in severe amnesia.
In comparison, in one patient whose entire right medial temporal lobe
(hippocampus and hippocampal gyrus) was removed, no residual memory deficit
was found (Figure 1.3.1). But the interesting patient was the young man who
had had bilateral medial temporal resection.
Fig. 1.3.1: Medial view of Human Brain (Source: Net)
The case history of patient H.M. – H.M. was a young man who suffered
from a difficult-to-treat from of epilepsy that progressed in severity during
his teen years. Over the years his physicians had treated him with the
available drugs to minimize his seizures, but these drugs were largely
ineffective for him. As his seizures worsened in his twenties, he decided to
try a then-radical new therapy that involved surgery. At that time
neurologists knew that many seizures originated in the medial portions of
the temporal lobe and from there spread to other areas of the brain, leading
to violent seizures and often loss of consciousness. It was also becoming
increasingly clear that surgically removing the brain region in which the
seizure activity originated, the so-called seizure focus, could help patients
with epilepsy. The decision in H.M.’ s case was to remove his medial temporal
lobe bilaterally, in a procedure called temporal lobectomy
SEPTUM
CINGULATE GYRUS
BASALGANGLIA
FORNIX
THALAMUS
MEDULLA
PONSHIPPOCAMPUS
ANYGDALA
PITUITARY
HYPOTHALPMUS
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX

===== PAGE 30 =====
34
Information Processing Following recovery from this major neurosurgical procedure, H.M.’s epilepsy
did improve. The surgery was a success, both with regard to his surviving the
risks associated with any surgery of the brain and with regard to the epilepsy.
However, physicians, family, and friends began to realise that H.M. was
experiencing new difficulties. For example, a year and a half after the surgery,
which was performed in September 1953, H.M. displayed clear problems with
his memory. Although it was April 1955 and H.M. was 29 years old, he reported
his age to be 27. H.M. would say he did not remember ever meeting certain
individuals, even when he actually spoke to them a few minutes earlier and they
merely left the room, returning after a short delay! H.M. was profoundly
amnesic—that is, he suffered from disorders of memory. However, H.M. did not
have the kind of amnesia one sees depicted in television shows or movies, where
the character has a total loss of all prior memories. Indeed, H.M. knew who he
was and could remember things about his life—that is, up until a period prior to
his surgery. However, it became increasingly clear that H.M. could not form new
long-term memories.
Formal neuropsychological tests were performed on H.M. to establish the nature
of his cognitive deficits. These tests showed that his intelligence was well above
normal after the surgery. He also had no perceptual or language problems and
seemed generally fine, with no changes in his personality or motivation. However,
when memory tests were administered, H.M. scored well below normal. The
bilateral removal of H.M.’s medial temporal lobe produced a highly selective
deficit in his memory ability, leaving other cognitive functions intact. H.M. had
normal short-term memory (sensory registers and working memory), but he
developed a severe and permanent inability to acquire and store new information
(Figure 1.3.2). The transfer of information from short-term storage to long-term
memory was disrupted.
Fig. 1.3.2: Major Areas of the Brain (Source: InterNet)
3.2.3 Amnesia and the Medial Temporal Lobe
Which region or regions of the medial temporal lobe were critical for supporting
the long-term memory ability lost in H.M.? The medial temporal area includes
sensori Motor Area
parietal lobe
visual
visual association
auditory associationauditory
temporal lobe
Broca's Area (in
left hemisphere)
prefrontal
area
frontal lobe

===== PAGE 31 =====
35
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory
the amygdala, the hippocampus, the entorhinal cortex, and the surrounding
parahippocampal and perirhinal cortical areas (Figure 1.3.1).
For the past 40 years, scientists studying H.M. used surgical reports of his lesions
to guide theories of memory and “amnesia and their neural bases. Reports by
Scoville, who performed the surgery, indicated that all of H.M.’s hippocampus
in each hemisphere had been removed. H.M.’s brain and surgical lesions were
re-evaluated with improved accuracy with high-resolution neuroimaging methods
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and it was found that in addition to
the hippocampus, some of H.M.’s surrounding cortex was also removed.
Is damage to the hippocampus sufficient to block the formation of new long-
term memories? Consider another patient, R.B., who lost his memory after an
ischemic episode (reduction of blood to brain) during bypass surgery. R.B.
developed dense anterograde amnesia similar to H.M.’s. He could not form new
long-term memories. He also had retrograde amnesia that extended back to 1 to
2 years, slightly less severe than H.M.’s retrograde loss. After his death, R.B.’s
brain was donated for study, permitting a detailed analysis of the extent of his
neuroanatomical damage. In R.B.’s case, lesions were found to be restricted to
his hippocampus; within each hippocampus, R.B. had sustained a specific lesion
restricted to the CA1 pyramidal cells.
These findings in patient R.B. support the idea that the hippocampus is crucial
in forming new long-term memories. R.B.’s case also supports the distinction
between areas that store long-term memories and the role of the hippocampus in
forming new memories. Even though retrograde amnesia is associated with medial
temporal lobe damage, it is temporally limited and does not affect long term
memories of events that happened more than a few years prior to the amnesia-
inducing event.
3.3 MEMORY CONSOLIDATION AND
HIPPOCAMPUS
Memories are solidified in long-term stores over days, weeks, months, and years.
This process is referred to as consolidation, an old concept that refers to how
long term memory develops over time after initial acquisition. From a cognitive
neuroscience perspective, consolidation is conceived of as biological changes
that underlie the long-term retention of learned information, and we can ask
what brain structures and systems support this process.
Because damage to the medial temporal lobe does not wipe out most of the
declarative memories formed over a lifetime, we know that the hippocampus is
not the repository of stored knowledge. Rather, the medial temporal lobe appears
to support the process of forming new memories; that is, the hippocampal region
is critical for the consolidation of information in long term memory. The strongest
evidence that the hippocampus is involved in consolidation comes from the fact
that amnesics have retrograde amnesia for memories from one to a few years
prior to the damage to the medial temporal lobe or diencephalon, a pattern that
does not support a storage role but rather a role in consolidation.
What might consolidation entail at the neural level? One idea is that consolidation
strengthens the associations between multiple stimulus inputs and activations of

===== PAGE 32 =====
36
Information Processing previously stored information. The hippocampus is hypothesised to coordinate
this strengthening, but the effects are believed to take place in the neocortex.
The idea is that once consolidation is complete, the hippocampus is no longer
required for storage or retrieval. Nonetheless, keep in mind that although the
memories are stored in the neocortex, the hippocampus is crucial for
consolidation.
Alcoholic Korsakoff’ s Syndrome and Diencephalic Amnesia - The medial
temporal lobe is not the only area of interest in human memory. Amnesia emerges
from brain damage in other regions too. For example, damage to midline structures
of the diencephalon of the brain causes amnesia. The prime structures are the
dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus and the mammillary bodies (Figure 1.3.2).
Damage to these midline subcortical regions can be caused by stroke, tumors,
and metabolic problems like those brought on by chronic alcoholism as well as
by trauma.
In the last half of the nineteenth century, the Russian psychiatrist Sergei Korsakoff
reported an anterograde and retrograde amnesia associated with alcoholism. Long
term alcohol abuse can lead to vitamin deficiencies that cause brain damage.
Patients suffering from alcoholic Korsakoff’s syndrome have degeneration in
the diencephalon, especially the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus and the
mammillary bodies. It remains unclear whether the dorsomedial thalamic nucleus,
the mammillary bodies, or both are necessary for the patients’ amnesia.
Nonetheless, damage to the diencephalon can produce amnesia.
3.4 ANTERIOR AND LATERAL TEMPORAL
LOBES AND MEMORY
If, as suggested earlier, the neocortex is crucial for the storage of memories, then
it should be possible to demonstrate retrograde amnesia with cortical damage,
even though most amnesias are anterograde. In line with this proposal, amnesia
can be caused by damage to regions of the neocortex.
One region of special interest is the temporal neocortex outside the medial
temporal lobe. Lesions that damage the lateral cortex of the anterior temporal
lobe, near the anterior pole, lead to a dense amnesia that includes severe retrograde
amnesia; in such cases the entorhinal cortex and perihippocampal cortex may be
involved. The retrograde amnesia may be severe, extending back many decades
before the amnesia-inducing event occurred or encompassing the patient’s entire
life. Various forms of damage can lead to this condition. Progressive neurological
diseases like Alzheimer’s, and herpes simplex encephalitis involving viral
infection of the brain are two such  conditions.
Some patients with dense retrograde amnesia might still form new long-term
memories. This type of amnesia is called isolated retrograde amnesia. It is
particularly related to damage of the anterior temporal lobe. This portion of the
temporal lobe is not, therefore, essential for acquiring new information.
Are these lateral and anterior regions of the temporal lobe the sites of storage of
long-term declarative memories? The answer is maybe, but another view is that
these regions may be particularly important for the retrieval of information from
long-term stores. Where then are memories stored? More recent evidence from

===== PAGE 33 =====
37
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory
neuroimaging studies suggests that memories are stored as distributed
representations throughout neocortex, involving the regions that originally
encoded the perceptual information and regions representing information that
was associated with this incoming information (as noted in the last section, the
medial temporal lobe may coordinate the consolidation of this information over
time).
3.5 ANIMAL MODELS OF MEMORY
Studies in monkeys with lesions to the hippocampus and surrounding cortex
have been invaluable in learning about the contributions of the medial temporal
lobe to primate memory systems. In general, the goal of such research is to develop
animal models of human memory and amnesia. Through research, such models
are providing key information on relations between specific memory and brain
structures. Several animal species, ranging from invertebrates to monkeys, have
been investigated for clues to human memory and its functional neuroanatomy
and neurobiology; it is likely that monkeys will contribute the most directly
applicable knowledge about human processes at the systems level given the
similarity among primate brains. We must always keep in mind, however, that
the gross organisation and functional capabilities of the brains of monkeys and
humans differ significantly. Thus, animal models of cognitive processes like
memory are perhaps most informative when linked with studies in humans.
One of the key questions in memory research was how much the hippocampus
alone, as compared with surrounding structures in the medial temporal lobe,
participated in the memory deficits of patients like H.M. In other words, what
structures of the medial temporal lobe system are involved in episodic memory?
For example, does the amygdala influence memory deficits in amnesics? Data
from amnesics indicate that the amygdala is not part of the brain’s episodic
memory system, although it has a role in emotion and emotional memories.
To verify this, surgical lesions were created in the medial temporal lobe and
amygdala of monkeys, to cause memory impairment. In classic work by Mortimer
Mishkin (1978) at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the
hippocampus or the amygdala, or both the hippocampus and the amygdala, of
monkeys were removed surgically. He found that the amount of impairment, as
measured on tests, varied according to what was lesioned.
In his early work, Mishkin found that in the monkey, memory was impaired only
if the lesion included the hippocampus and amygdala. This led to the idea that
the amygdala was a key structure in memory. The idea does not fit well with data
from amnesics like R.B., who had anterograde amnesia caused by a lesion
restricted to neurons of the hippocampus and no damage to the amygdala. Stuart
Zola and colleagues (1993) at the University of California at San Diego
investigated this dilemma. They performed more selective lesions of the brains
of monkeys by distinguishing between the amygdala and hippocampus, as well
as the surrounding cortex near each structure. They surgically created lesions of
the amygdala, the entorhinal cortex, or the surrounding neocortex of the
parahippocampal gyrus and the perirhipal cortex (Brodmann’s areas 35 and 36)
(Figure 1.3.3).

===== PAGE 34 =====
38
Information Processing
Fig. 1.3.3: Broca’s areas of the Brain (Source: Net)
They found that lesions of the hippocampus and amygdala produced the most
severe memory deficits only when the cortex surrounding these regions was also
lesioned. When lesions of the hippocampus and amygdala were made but the
surrounding cortex was spared, the presence or absence of the amygdala lesion
did not affect the monkey’s memory. The amygdala, then, could not be part of
the system that supported the acquisition of long-term memory.
In subsequent investigations, Zola and his colleagues selectively created lesions
of the surrounding cortex in the perirhinal, entorhinal, and parahippocampal
regions. This worsened memory performance in delayed nonmatching to sample
tests. Follow-up work showed that lesions of only the parahippocampal and
perirhinal cortices also produced significant memory deficit.
How does this make sense in relation to R.B’s profound anterograde amnesia
with damage limited to the hippocampus and not involving the surrounding para-
hippocampal or perirhinal cortex? The parahippocampal and perirhinal areas
receive information from the visual, auditor, and somatosensory association cortex
and send these inputs to the hippocampus, and from there to other cortical regions.
The hippocampus cannot function properly if these vital connections are damaged.
But more than this, we now also know that these regions are involved in much
processing themselves, and hence lesions restricted to the hippocampus do not
produce as severe a form of amnesia as do lesions that include surrounding cortex.
In summary, the data from animals are highly consistent with evidence from
amnesic patients such as R.B. and H.M. that implicates the hippocampal system
in the medial temporal lobe and the associated cortex as critical for forming
long-term memories. Lesions that damage the hippocampus directly, or damage
the input-output relation of the hippocampus with the neocortex, produce severe
memory impairments. The amygdala is not a crucial part of the system for episodic
memory but is important for emotional memory. Moreover, the animal data match
well with those from amnesics with regard to the preservation of short-term
memory processes after the medial temporal lobe has been damaged; monkeys
memory deficits in the delay mismatching to sample task became more
pronounced as the interval between the sample and test increased. The medial
temporal lobe, then, is not essential for short-term or working memory processes.


===== PAGE 35 =====
39
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory
As we noted earlier, the medial temporal lobe is not the locus of long-term storage
because retrograde amnesia is not total after damage to this area; rather, the
medial temporal lobe is a key component in organising and consolidating long-
term memory that is permanently stored in a distributed fashion in the neocortex.
3.6 IMAGING THE HUMAN BRAIN AND MEMORY
The work described so far has dealt with evidence from humans and animals
with brain damage. These data are consistent with regard to the role of the medial
temporal lobe in memory. Over the past decade, there has been an exponential
increase in studies of normal subjects using functional brain imaging methods.
The results are quite provocative and are confirming and extending the findings
from lesion studies. In the following, we review recent studies of the brain
organisation of episodic memory, semantic memory, procedural memory, and
the perceptual representation system (PRS).
3.6.1 Episodic Encoding and Retrieval
Given the purported role of the hippocampus system in encoding memory in
long-term stores, researchers have eagerly addressed this issue using positron
emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
One such line of work involved face encoding and recognition. The question
was whether the Hippocampus becomes active when encoding new information.
James Haxby, Leslie Ungerleider, and their colleagues (1996) at the NIMH
presented subjects with pictures of either faces or nonsense patterns, and, using
PET, investigated memory performance. In different conditions subjects were
required to remember (encode) the face, recognise the face, and perceptually
analyse the face by comparing two faces. During these periods, PET scans
recorded changes in regional cerebral blood flow triggered by local neuronal
activity.
These investigators observed that the right hippocampus region was activated
during encoding of the face but not during recognition, where retrieval processes
should have been engaged. These data are consistent with those from amnesic
patients who had medial temporal lobe damage that led to anterograde amnesia
but preserved distant retrograde memories. Encoding also activated the left
prefrontal cortex, whereas recognition activated the right prefrontal cortex. Thus,
we have more support for the hippocampus’s role in memory, as well as possible
support for hemispheric asymmetries in memory functions.
Encoding and retrieval processes were lateralised in the left and right hemispheres,
respectively, giving rise to a model with the acronym of HERA, which stands for
“hemispheric encoding-retrieval asymmetry.” This model represents the idea that
encoding involves the left hemisphere more than the right, and retrieval involves
the right hemisphere more than the left. Both processes predominantly involve
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In encoding and retrieving information from
long-term memory, neocortical areas were the most activated.
Some more recent studies made use of event-related fMRI methods to track the
processing of individual items as a function of the success of the encoding, as
indexed by later memory performance. Anthony Wagner and his colleagues at
MIT, Harvard University, and Massachusetts General Hospital (1998), and John

===== PAGE 36 =====
40
Information Processing Gabrieli and his colleagues at Stanford (Brewer et al., 1998) conducted such
studies. They presented subjects with items and scanned their brains using of
MRI while they were encoding the information, and then later tested them for
their memories of the items. Each research group found that event-related
responses were larger in prefrontal and medial temporal regions (parahippocampal
cortex) during encoding of words or pictures that were later remembered.
3.6.2 Semantic Encoding and Retrieval
The encoding and retrieval of semantic knowledge also have been studied using
functional neuroimaging, and significant new findings have been uncovered. In
particular, evidence for domain-specific organisation (i.e., knowledge of animate
and inanimate objects is localised in different cortical regions) has proved to be
a fascinating story. Unlike episodic retrieval that activates the right prefrontal
cortex, semantic retrieval involves the left prefrontal cortex. The region includes
Broca’s area (Brodmann’s area 44 extending into area 46) and the ventral lateral
region (Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45) (Figure 1.3.3). This lateralisation to the
left hemisphere remains regardless of whether the memories being retrieved are
of objects or words.
3.6.3 Procedural Memory Encoding and Retrieval
Earlier we learned that amnesics demonstrate implicit learning of motor sequences
(procedural knowledge) even when they cannot form explicit memories about
the stimulus sequence. Amnesics provide powerful evidence that implicit learning
need not be mediated by explicit knowledge about the material.
Scott Grafton, Eliot Hazeltine, and Ivry (1995) investigated the brain basis of
procedural motor learning in normal subjects. They compared conditions in which
the subjects learned motor sequences implicitly during dual-task conditions, which
helped to prevent subjects from explicitly noticing and learning the sequence.
PET conducted during the dual-task condition demonstrated activation of the
motor cortex and the supplementary motor area of the left hemisphere, and the
putamen in the basal ganglia bilaterally. Also activated were the rostral prefrontal
cortex and parietal cortex. Therefore, when subjects were implicitly learning the
task, brain areas that control limb movements were activated. When the distracting
auditory task was removed, the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, right pre
motor cortex, right putamen, and parieto-occipital cortex were activated
bilaterally.
3.6.4 Perceptual Priming and Implicit and Explicit Memory
Daniel Schacter and his colleagues (1996) at Harvard University investigated
the neural bases of perceptual priming (implicit learning) in a PET study. The
scanning was performed only during the task. Subjects manifested implicit
priming behaviourally. No activations or deactivations were noted in the
hippocampus, but blood flow in the bilateral occipital cortex, (area 19) decreased
(Figure 1.3.3). The hippocampus was not activated, then, even though implicit
perceptual priming was obtained.
The conclusions from this and other studies are that implicit and explicit retrieval
of information is subserved by separate brain systems. Together with the face
encoding data Haxby and colleagues obtained by PET, and animal and human
lesion data, a reasonable conclusion is that the hippocampus encodes new

===== PAGE 37 =====
41
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory
information but also retrieves recent information when explicit recollection is
involved. Perhaps more interestingly, deactivation of the visual cortex for
previously seen words is a correlate of perceptual priming.
In summary, neuroimaging studies have demonstrated patterns of neuronal
activation that are consistent with memory systems derived from cognitive
research, studies in human amnesics, and animal models. Neuroimaging also
has provided some notable new findings in the cognitive neuroscience of memory,
including, for example, the hemispheric asymmetries in encoding and retrieval.
3.7 CELLULAR BASES OF LEARNING AND
MEMORY
How does the activity of different brain regions change as memories are formed?
Most models of the cellular bases of memory hold that it is the result of changes
in the strength of synaptic interactions among neurons in neural networks. How
would synaptic strength be altered to enable learning and memory? Neil Carlson
(1994) described some basic physiological mechanisms for learning new
information.
One basic mechanism is Hebb’ s law, named after the man who posited it, Canadian
psychologist Donald Hebb, in 1949. Hebb’s rule states that if a synapse between
two neurons is repeatedly activated at about the same time the postsynaptic neuron
fires, the structure or the chemistry of neuron changes and the synapse will be
strengthened—this is known as Hebbian learning. A more general, and more
complex, mechanism is called long-term potentiation (LTP) . In this process,
neural circuits in the hippocampus that are subjected to repeated and intense
electrical stimulation develop hippocampal cells that become more sensitive to
stimuli.
That an excitatory input and postsynaptic depolarisation are needed to produce
LTP is explained by the properties of the doubly gated N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor located on the dendritic spines of postsynaptic neurons that
show LTP. Glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter in the hippocampus,
and it can bind with NMDA and non-NMDA receptors. When 2-amino-5-
phosphonopentanoate (AP5) is introduced to neurons, NMDA receptors are
chemically blocked and LTP induction is prevented. But the AP5 treatment does
not produce any effect on previously established LTP in these cells.
Therefore, NMDA receptors are central to producing LTP but not maintaining it.
It turns out that maintenance of LTP may depend on the non-NMDA receptors.
Long-Term Potentiation and Memory Performance -  This effect of enhanced
response can last for weeks or even longer, suggesting to many that this could be
a mechanism for long-term learning and retention (Baddeley, 1993).
Disrupting the process of long-term potentiation (say, through different drugs)
also disrupts learning and remembering. Chemically blocking LTP in the
hippocampus of normal mice impairs their ability to demonstrate normal place
learning; thus, blocking LTP prevents normal spatial memory. In a similar way,
genetic manipulations that block the cascade of molecular triggers for LTP also
impair spatial learning.

===== PAGE 38 =====
42
Information Processing These experiments provide strong evidence of impairing spatial memory by
blocking NMDA receptors and preventing LTP. Moreover, we are rapidly
developing a very clear understanding of the molecular processes that support
synaptic plasticity, and thus learning and memory in the brain.
3.8 LET US SUM UP
The ability to acquire new information and retain it over time defines learning
and memory. Cognitive theory and neuroscientific evidence argue that memory
is supported by multiple cognitive and neural systems. These systems support
different aspects of memory, and their distinctions in quality can be readily
identified. Sensory registration, perceptual representation, working memory,
procedural memory, semantic memory, and episodic memory all represent systems
or subsystems for learning and memory. The brain structures that support various
memory processes differ, depending on the type of information to be retained
and how it is encoded and retrieved.
Despite the intriguing results from neuropsychological studies, we are far from
having a complete picture of how the brain instantiates all, or even many, memory
phenomenon. It is not clear which aspects of memory are localised in one place
in the brain and which are distributed across different cortical regions. Tulving
pointed that neuroscientists today reject the idea of studying memory as though
it were a single process. Instead, they are likely to look for neurological
underpinnings at a more precise level – at such processes as encoding or retrieval.
The latest neuroimaging techniques clearly will continue to provide invaluable
information about human memory and its neural substrates in the healthy human
in the years to come.
3.9 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Summarize the findings of neuropsychological research on localising memory
in the brain.
2) Compare and contrast the human and animal models of the study of neural
basis of memory.
3) What exactly do findings from memory studies with amnesic patients tell us
about the way memory operates in nonamnesic people?
4) Imagine what it would be like to recover from one of the forms of amnesia.
Describe your impressions of and reactions to your newly recovered memory
abilities.
5) How would you design an experiment to study the neural process of semantic
memory by functional MRI technique?
6) Patient H.M. and others with damage to the medial temporal lobe develop
amnesia. What form of amnesia do they develop, and what information can
they retain, and what doe sthis tell us about how memories are encoded in
the brain?

===== PAGE 39 =====
43
Neuropsychological Basis of
Learning and Memory3.10 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Galotti, K.M. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Perception, Attention, and Memory.
London: Cengage.
Solso, R.L. (2006). Cognitive Psychology. New Delhi: Pearson Education.
References
Gazzaniga, M.S., Ivry, R., & Mangun, G .R. (2002). Cognitive Neuroscience:
The Biology of the Mind. New York: W.W. Norton.
Gleitman, L. R., Liberman, M., & Osherson, D. N. (Eds.)(2000). An Invitation
to Cognitive Science, 2nd Ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levinthal, C.F. (1990). Introduction to Physiological Psychology. New Jersey:
Prentice Hall.
Sternberg, R.J. (2009). Applied Cognitive Psychology: Perceiving, Learning,
and Remembering. London: Cengage.

===== PAGE 40 =====
44
Information Processing
UNIT 4 MODELS OF INFORMATION
PROCESSING
“Information is a source of learning. But unless it is organised, processed, and
available to the right people in a format for decision making, it is a burden, not
a benefit.”
– William Pollard
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Objectives
4.2 Waugh and Norman’s Model of Primary and Secondary Memory
4.3 Atkinson and Shiffrin’s the Stage Model
4.4 Level of Recall
4.5 Levels of Processing: Craik and Lockhart
4.6 Self Reference Effect
4.7 A Connectionist Model of Memory: Rumelhart and McClelland
4.8 Let Us Sum Up
4.9 Unit End Questions
4.10 Suggested Readings and References
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Cognition as a psychological area of study goes far beyond simply the taking in
and retrieving information. Neisser (1967), one of the most influential researchers
in cognition, defined it as the study of how people encode, structure, store, retrieve,
use or otherwise learn knowledge. The information processing approach to human
cognition remains very popular in the field of psychology.
Information processing is the change (processing) of information in any manner
detectable by an observer. Within the field of cognitive psychology, information
processing is an approach to the goal of understanding human thinking. It arose
in the 1940s and 1950s. The essence of the approach is to see cognition as being
essentially computational in nature, with mind being the software and the brain
being the hardware.
One of the primary areas of cognition studied by researches is memory. By the
1960s research in memory had reached a high state of activity, and it was about
this time that some formalised comprehensive theories of memory were beginning
to be formulated. There are many hypotheses and suggestions as to how this
integration occurs, and many new theories have built upon established beliefs in
this area. Currently, there is widespread consensus on several aspects of
information processing; however, there are many dissentions in reference to
specifics on how the brain actually codes or manipulates information as it is
stored in memory. This section considers a few of the more viable memory theories
of that time.

===== PAGE 41 =====
45
Models of Infromation
Processing4.1 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:
• define information processing approach;
• discussing the various models of information processing;
• explain levels of recall; and
• describe levels of processing.
4.2 WAUGH AND NORMAN’S MODEL OF
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY MEMORY
The first modern behavioural model to travel down memory lane, and one whose
concept of primary memory has served as a departure point for most modern
theories, was developed by Waugh and Norman (1965). The theory is dualistic;
primary memory (PM), a short-term storage system, is conceptualised as being
independent of secondary memory (SM), a longer-term storage system. Waugh
and Norman borrowed freely from William James’s dichotomy of primary and
secondary memory and illustrated their theory by means of the model shown in
Figure below, which encouraged the memory metaphor of boxes in the head that
soon proliferated in the literature of cognitive psychology.
What Waugh and Norman did that James never attempted was to quantify
properties of primary memory. This short-term storage system was taken to have
very limited capacity, so that loss of information from it was postulated to occur
not as a simple function of time but (once the storage capacity was exhausted)
by displacement of old items by new ones. PM could be conceptualised as a
storage compartment much like a vertical file, in which information is stored in
a slot or, if all the slots are filled, displaces an item occupying one of the slots.
Fig. 1.4.1: Model of Primary and Secondary Memory ( Adapted from Waugh and Norman
(1965)
Waugh and Norman traced the fate of items in PM (primary memory) by using
lists of sixteen digits, that were read to subjects at the rate of one digit per second
or four digits per second. The purpose of presenting digits every second or quarter
second was to determine whether forgetting was a function of decay (presumed
to be due to time) or interference in PM.
 
Stimulus Primary
Memory
Secondary
Memory
Forgotton
Rehearsal

===== PAGE 42 =====
46
Information Processing If forgetting was a function of decay, then less recall could be expected with the
slower rate (one digit per second); if forgetting was a function of interference in
PM, then no difference in recall could be expected according to the presentation
rate. The same amount of information is presented at both presentation rates,
which, by Waugh and Norman’s logic, allows the same time for decay to occur.
It might be argued that even at one item per second, subjects would allow extra
experimental information to enter their PM, but later experimentation (Norman,
1966) in which presentation rates varied from one to ten digits (for a given period),
yielded data  consistent with a rate of forgetting expected from the original model.
The rate of forgetting for the two presentation rates is similar. Interference seems
to be a greater factor than decay in forgetting in PM.
Waugh and Norman’s system makes good sense. PM holds verbal information
and is available for verbatim recall; this is true in our ordinary conversation. We
can recall that last part of a sentence we have just heard with complete accuracy,
even if we were barely paying attention to what was said. However, to recall the
same information sometime later is impossible unless we rehearse it, which makes
it available through SM.
4.3 ATKINSON AND SHIFFRIN’S THE STAGE
MODEL
Traditionally, the most widely used model of information processing is the stage
theory model, based on the work of Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968). The key
elements of this model are that it views learning and memory as discontinuous
and multi-staged. It is hypothesised that as new information is taken in, it is in
some way manipulated before it is stored. The stage theory model, as shown in
Figure 1.4.2, recognises three types or stages of memory: sensory memory, short-
term or working memory, and long-term memory.
Fig. 1.4.2: A stage model of memory (Adapted from Atkinson and Shiffrin 1969)
In the Atkinson-Shiffrin model, memory starts with a sensory input from the
environment. This input is held for a very brief time – several seconds at most –
in a sensory register associated with the sensory channels (vision, hearing, touch,
and so forth). This occurs in as little as ½ second for visual stimuli (Sperling, 1960),


===== PAGE 43 =====
47
Models of Infromation
Processing
and about 4 or 5 seconds for auditory stimuli (Darwin et al., 1972). The transfer
of new information quickly to the next stage of processing is of critical importance,
and sensory memory acts as a portal for all information that is to become part of
memory. There are many ways to ensure transfer and many methods for facilitating
that transfer. To this end, attention and automaticity are the two major influences
on sensory memory, and much work has been done to understand the impact of
each on information processing.
Information that is attended to and recognised in the sensory register may be
passed on to second stage of information processing, i.e. short-term memory
(STM) or working memory, where it is held for perhaps 20 or 30 seconds. This
stage is often viewed as active or conscious memory because it is the part of
memory that is being actively processed while new information is being taken
in. Some of the information reaching short-term memory is processed by being
rehearsed – that is, by having attention focused on it, perhaps by being repeated
over and over (maintenance rehearsal), or perhaps by being processed in some
other way that will link it up with other information already stored in memory
(elaborate rehearsal). Generally 5 + 2 number of units can be processed at any
given time in STM.
Information that is rehearsed may then be passed along to long-term memory
(LTM); information not so processed is lost. When items of information are placed
in long-term memory, they are organised into categories, where they may reside
for days, months, years, or for a lifetime. When you remember something, a
representation of the item is withdrawn, or retrieved, from long-term memory.
Organisations of long-term memory - Each of the memory unit or structures
represented in the mind is distinct and serves a different operational function.
However, it is evident that some type of very specialised categorisation system
exists within the human mind. One of the first to make this idea explicit was
Bruner (as cited in Anderson, 1998). “Based upon the idea of categorisation,
Bruner’s theory states ‘To perceive is to categorise, to conceptualise is to
categorise, to learn is to form categories, to make decisions is to categorise’”.
Tulving (1972) was the first to distinguish between episodic and semantic
memory. “Episodic memories are those which give a subject the sense of
remembering the actual situation, or event” (Eliasmith, 2001). Episodic memory’s
store is centered on personal experience and specific events. It is entirely
circumstantial and it is not generally used for the processing of new information
except as a sort of backdrop. Semantic memory, in contrast, deals with general,
abstract information and can be recalled independently of how it was learned. It
is semantic memory that is the central focus of most current study because it
houses the concepts, strategies and other structures that are typically used for
encoding new information. Most researchers now combine these two in a broader
category labeled declarative.
Other researchers have identified additional organisational types. For example,
Abbott lists declarative and procedural while Huitt (2000), citing the work of
Paivio (1971, 1986) adds imagery to this list. However, Pylyshyn (2002) states
that imagery is not a distinct organisational structure, but follows the rules that
apply to semantic and episodic memory. Abbott (2002) and Huitt (2000) define
declarative memory as that which can be talked about or verbalised. It is, then,

===== PAGE 44 =====
48
Information Processing the sum of stored information that can be readily retrieved and put into words in
conscious thought and sharing. As previously stated, declarative memory can be
subdivided into both semantic and episodic memories. Procedural memory can
be thought of as “how to” knowledge (Huitt, 2000). It is the type of long-term
memory sometimes associated with information that has reached a state of
automaticity, but it not limited to this. This type of memory is defined in terms of
learned skills and the ability to recall instruction-like memory. Paivio (1971,
1986) describes imagery as the memory structure for collecting and storing
information related to pictures. It captures information much like a photograph
and can be extremely useful for context and visual presentation of information.
Information Processing in Three Stage Model - Atkinson and Shiffrin make an
important distinction between the concepts of memory and memory stores; they
use the term memory to refer to the data being retained, while store refers to the
structural component that contains the information. Simply indicating how long
an item has been retained does not necessarily reveal where it is located in the
structure of memory.
Information processing from one store to another is largely controlled by the
subject. Information briefly held in the sensory register is scanned by the subject,
and selected information is introduced into the STS. Transfer of information
from the STS was regarded as capable of taking place so long as it was held
there. Atkinson and Shiffrin postulated that information might enter the long-
term store directly from the sensory register.
4.4 LEVEL OF RECALL
In a report by P. I. Zinchenko (1962, 1981), a Russian psychologist, the matter of
how a subject interacts with the material to be learned and committed to memory
was introduced. The basic notion was that words encoded by deep means would
be retained in incidental memory better than if encoded by other, superficial
means. Thus the memorability of words was profoundly influenced by the goal
of the subject at the time the material was presented. Different goals were thought
to activate different systems of connections because subjects have different
orientations toward the material.
The thesis was tested in an experiment in which subjects were given ten series of
four words. The first word was to be connected to one of the other words, but the
instructions varied for each of three groups. An example of a series is HOUSE—
WINDOW—BUILDING—FISH.  In the first condition the subjects were asked to
identify the word whose meaning was different from the first word (HOUSE—
FISH). In a second condition subjects were asked to make a concrete connection
between the first word and one of the other words [HOUSE—WINDOW).  In the
third condition the subjects were asked to make a “logical” connection between
the first word and one of the other three words [HOUSE—BUILDING].
Zinchenko thought that by altering the instructions the subjects would not only
have different goals toward the material but also be required to examine each
item for meaning. After a brief interrupting task, the subjects were asked to recall
the items. In the condition in which subjects formed logical connections between
the first word and another word, recall of the target word occurred with greater
frequency than the other conditions. Recall of the concrete relationship words
was greater than the no-meaning condition.

===== PAGE 45 =====
49
Models of Infromation
Processing
Thus the level of recall (LOR), as Zinchenko called it, is determined by the goal
of an action. In the experiment cited, we can see that when subjects were given
a learning set, or instructions to process material at different levels (to use
contemporary jargon), recall of the material was affected greatly. Because the
original paper was published in Russian and not widely distributed, it has not
been incorporated into the larger framework of memory models. Nevertheless,
as we shall see, the experiment presented by Zinchenko, because of its theoretical
importance to the concept of levels of processing, which has had a profound
influence on cognitive psychology, has important consequences for our
conceptualisation of human memory.
4.5 LEVELS OF PROCESSING: CRAIK AND
LOCKHART
It is likely that progress in the early stages of scientific development is made
more by reaction and counterreaction than by the discovery of great immutable
truths. Craik and Lockhart’s (1972) levels-of-processing (LOP) model,  as a
reaction against the boxes-in-the-head scheme of memory, is consistent with
that view. They take the position that data can be better described by a concept of
memory based on levels of processing. The general idea is that incoming stimuli
are subjected to a series of analyses starting with shallow sensory analysis and
proceeding to deeper, more complex, abstract, and semantic analyses.
Whether a stimulus is processed at a shallow or deep stage depends on the nature
of the stimulus and the time available for processing. An item processed at a
deep level is less likely to be forgotten than one processed at a shallow level. At
the earliest level, incoming stimuli are subjected to sensory and featural analyses;
at a deeper level, the item may be recognised by means of pattern recognition
and extraction of meaning; at a still deeper level, it may engage the subject’s
long-term associations.
With deeper processing a greater degree of semantic or cognitive analysis is
undertaken. Consider word recognition, for example. At the preliminary stages,
the visual configuration may be analysed according to such physical or sensory
features as lines and angles. Later stages are concerned with matching the stimuli
with stored information—for example, recognition that one of the letters
corresponds to the pattern identified as A. At the highest level, the recognised
pattern “may trigger associations, images or stories on the basis of the subject’s
past experience with the word” (Craik & Lockhart, 1972).
The significant issue, in Craik and Lockhart’s view, is that we are capable of
perceiving at meaningful levels before we analyse information at a more primitive
level. Thus, levels of processing are more a “spread” of processing, with highly
familiar, meaningful stimuli more likely to be processed at a deeper level than
less meaningful stimuli.
That we can perceive at a deeper level before analysing at a shallow level casts
grave doubts on the original levels-of-processing formulation. Perhaps we are
dealing simply with different types of processing, with the types not following
any constant sequence. If all types are equally accessible to the incoming stimulus,
then the notion of levels could be replaced by a system that drops the notion of

===== PAGE 46 =====
50
Information Processing levels or depth but retains some of Craik and Lockhart’s ideas about rehearsal
and about the formation of memory traces.
A model that is closer to their original idea is shown in Figure 1.4.3. This figure
depicts the memory activation involved in proofreading a passage as contrasted
with that involved in reading the same passage for the gist of the material.
Proofreading, that is, looking at the surface of the passage, involves elaborate
shallow processing and minimal semantic processing.
Reading for gist, that is, trying to get the essential points, involves minimal
shallow processing, or “maintenance rehearsal” (held in memory without
elaboration), but elaborate semantic processing. Another example of this latter
kind of memory activity would be a typist who concentrates on responding to
letter sequences but has very little understanding of the material being typed.
As a result of some studies (Craik & Watkins, 1973; and Lockhart, Craik, &
Jacoby, 1975), the idea that stimuli are always processed through an unvarying
sequence of stages was abandoned, while the general principle that some sensory
processing must precede semantic analysis was retained.
Fig. 1.4.3: Memory activation in two kind of reading. (Adapted from Solso, 2006)
Levels of Processing versus Information Processing. Information-processing
models of memory have generally stressed structural components (for example,
sensory store, STM, and LTM) dealing with processing (for example, attention,
coding, rehearsal, transformation of information, and forgetting) as operations
that are tied (sometimes uniquely) to the structural components. However, another
approach is to postulate process and then to formulate a memory system in terms
of these operations. Craik and Lockhart have taken just such a position, and their
implicit criticism of the information processing model (along with Neisser, 1976)
suggests that it is falling on hard times.
Where information-processing models of memory stress the sequence of stages
through which information is moved and processed, this alternate viewpoint
argues that memory traces are formed as a by -product of perceptual processing.
Thus, the durability of memory is conceptualised as a function of the depth of
processing. Information that is not given full attention and is analysed only to a
shallow level is soon forgotten; information that is deeply processed—attended
to, fully analysed and enriched by associations or images—is long lasting. The
levels-of-processing model is not free of criticism (see Craik & Tulving, 1975;
and Baddeley, 1978). The criticism includes that (1) it seems to say little more
than that meaningful events are well remembered, a mundane conclusion; (2) it
Proofreading Gist
Elaborat
rehearsal
Maintenance rehearsal
Deeper Levels
 
 

===== PAGE 47 =====
51
Models of Infromation
Processing
is vague and generally untestable; and (3) it is circular in that any events that are
well remembered are designated “deeply processed,” with no objective and
independent index of depth available.
One clear difference between the boxes-in-the-head theory (Waugh and Norman,
and Atkinson and Shiffrin) and the levels-of-processing theory (Craik and
Lockhart) is their respective notions concerning rehearsal. In the former, rehearsal,
or repetition, of information in STM serves the function of transferring it to a
longer-lasting memory store; in the latter, rehearsal is conceptualised as either
maintaining information at one level of analysis or elaborating information by
processing it to a deeper level. The first type, maintenance rehearsal, will not
lead to better retention.
Craik and Tulving (1975) tested the idea that words that are deeply processed
should be recalled better than those that are less so. They did this by having
subjects simply rate words as to their structural, phonemic, or semantic aspects.
Craik and Tulving measured both the time to make a decision and recognition of
the rated words. The data  obtained are interpreted as showing that (1) deeper
processing takes longer to accomplish and (2) recognition of encoded words
increases as a function of the level to which they are processed, with those words
engaging semantic aspects better recognised than those engaging only the
phonological or structural aspects. Using slightly different tasks, D’Agostino,
O’Neill, and Paivio (1977); Klein and Saltz (1976); and Schulman (1974) obtained
similar results.
4.6 SELF REFERENCE EFFECT
New light was shed on the levels-of-processing concept when Rogers, Kuiper,
and Kirker [1977) showed that self-reference is a powerful method variable.
Using a method similar to that of Craik and Tulving (1975), they asked subjects
to evaluate a list of forty adjectives on one of four tasks hypothesised to vary in
depth, or semantic richness. Included were structural, phonemic, semantic, and
self-reference tasks.
As in the Craik and Tulving study, it was assumed that words more deeply coded
during rating should be recalled better than those words with shallow coding.
After the subjects rated the words, they were asked to free-recall as many of the
words they had rated as possible. Recall was poorest for words rated structurally
and ascended through those phonemically rated and semantically rated. Self-
reference words were recalled best.
The Narcissistic Trait Modifications of the original experiment have been
conducted in several laboratories with the results being about the same. Some
have argued that self-reference tasks are stored in some special memory system.
Certainly, if you are asked to evaluate a personality trait as being self-descriptive,
such as greedy, loving, or angry, you are engaging a very powerful self-schema,
an organised system of internal attributes that is constellated around the topic of
“I, me, mine.” We also call this the narcissistic trait. Since we all know a great
deal about ourselves (and are emotionally, if not intellectually, deeply invested
in ourselves) we have a rich and elaborate internal network available for storing
self-information. Because of these complex internal self structures we can more

===== PAGE 48 =====
52
Information Processing easily organise new information as it might refer to ourselves than other, more
mundane information (see Bellezza 1992 for several important studies on this
theme). Whether or not these self-rating memories are stored in different parts of
the brain remains a question, but it is a good hunch that plenty of precious brain
space is given over to the narcissistic trait.
4.7 A CONNECTIONIST (PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED
PROCESSING) MODEL OF MEMORY:
RUMELHART AND MCCLELLAND
Many people have been associated with this model of human cognition, but
David Rumelhart and James McClelland have done the most to formalise the
theory.
Essentially, the model is neutrally inspired, concerned with the kind of processing
mechanism that is the human mind. Is it a type of von Neumann computer – a
Johniac – in which information is processed in sequential steps? Alternatively,
might the human mind process information in a massively distributed, mutually
interactive parallel system in which various activities are carried out
simultaneously through excitation and/or inhibition of neural cells? PDPers opt
for latter explanation.
“These [PDP] models assume that information processing takes place through
the interactions of a large number of simple processing elements called units,
each sending excitatory and inhibitory signals to other units” (McClelland,
Rumelhart, & Hinton, 1986). These units may stand for possible guesses about
letters in a string of words or notes on a score. In other situations, the units may
stand for possible goals and actions, such as reading a particular letter or playing
a specific note. Proponents suggest that PDP models are concerned with the
description of the internal structure of larger units of cognitive activity, such as
reading, perceiving, processing sentences, and so on.
The connectionist (or PDP) model attempts to describe memory from the even
finer-grained analysis of processing units, which resemble neurons. Furthermore,
the connectionist model is based on the development of laws that govern the
representation of knowledge in memory. One additional feature of the PDP model
of memory is that it is not just a model of memory; it is also a model for action
and the representation of knowledge.
A fundamental assumption of the PDP model is that mental processes take place
through a system of highly interconnected units, which take on activation values
and communicate with other units. Units are simple processing elements that
stand for possible hypotheses about the nature of things, such as letters in a
display, the rules that govern syntax, and goals or actions (for example, the goal
of typing a letter on a key board or playing a note on the piano). Units can be
compared to atoms, in that both are building blocks for more complete structures
and combine with others of their kind to form larger networks. A neuron in the
brain is a type of unit that combines with other neurons in a parallel processing
mode to form larger systems.
Units are organised into modules, much as atoms are organised into molecules.
The number of units per module range from thousands to millions. Each unit

===== PAGE 49 =====
53
Models of Infromation
Processing
receives information from other modules and, after processing, passes information
to other modules. In this model, information is received, is permeated throughout
the model, and leaves traces behind when it has passed through. These traces
change in the strength (sometimes called weight) of the connections between
individual units in the model.
A memory trace, such as a friend’s name, may be distributed over many different
connections. The storage of information (for example, friend’s name) is thought
to be content addressable—that is, we can access the information in memory on
the basis of its attributes. You can recall your friend’s name if I show you a
picture of him, tell you where he lives, or describe what he does. All of these
attributes may be used to access the name in memory. Of course, some cues are
better than others.
Even though the theory is abstract, it touches real-life activities. To continue
with the example of your friend’s name, suppose I ask, “What is the name of the
man you play tennis with?” Such an inquiry gives at least two content-addressable
cues: man and tennis partner. If you play tennis with only one man (and you
know his name), then the answer should be easy. If you have many partners who
are men, then the answer may be impossible.
Additional information (for example, the man with the beard, the left handed
player, the guy with red tennis shorts, the dude with the rocketlike serve, the
chap with the Boston terrier, and so forth) may easily focus the search. You can
imagine how very narrow the search would be if all of these attributes were
associated with only one person: the man you play tennis with has a beard, is
left-handed, wears red tennis shorts, has a hot serve, and has a terrier.
In real life, each of these attributes may be associated with more than one person.
You may know several people who have a hot serve or have a beard. If that is the
case, it is possible to recall names other than the intended one. However, if the
categories are specific and mutually exclusive, retrieval is likely to be accurate.
How can a PDP modular concept of memory keep these interfering components
from running into each other?
According to this model, information is represented in memory in terms of
numerous connections with other units. If an attribute is part of a number of
different memories and is activated (for example. What was your friend’s name
...?), then it will tend to excite all the memories in which the attribute is a part.
One way interfering components are kept from overrunning the system is to
conceptualise the relationship between units as being subject to inhibitory laws.
Thus, when we identify the person you play tennis with as a man, in theory we
inhibit all searches for people who are women. When we add that he has a Boston
terrier, then we do not search for the names of people with whom you do not
play tennis and who do not own a Boston terrier.
Consider the following example of prototype learning, suggested by McClelland
and Rumelhart (1986). A small boy sees many different dogs, each only once
and each with a different name. All the dogs have slightly different features but
can be considered a variation of the prototype dog, the epitome of “dogness.”
The boy forms a memory for a prototypical dog on the basis of experience with
exemplar dogs. As in the case of faces, the boy is likely to recognise the prototype
dog as a dog, even if he has never seen it. Of course, the boy is not likely to

===== PAGE 50 =====
54
Information Processing remember the names of each of the individual dogs, though the most recently
seen dog may still be in memory.
The rationale offered by the connectionist model for prototype formation in the
case of the boy and his (prototype) dog is that each time the boy sees a dog, a
visual pattern of activation is produced over several of the units in the module.
In contrast, the name of the dog produces a reduced pattern of activation. The
combined activation of all exemplar dogs sums to the prototype dog, which may
be the stable memory representation. Thus, the model, more detailed than
presented here, seems to account for this form of memory quite nicely.
The connectionist model of memory has won many disciples in the past few
years. Its popularity is due in part to its elegant mathematical models, its
relationship to neural networks, and its flexibility in accounting for diverse forms
of memories.
4.8 LET US SUM UP
In summary, there are many different theories and models of information
processing that focus on different aspects of perceiving, remembering, and
reasoning. There are many constant themes of information processing regardless
of the specific theory to which one subscribes. Almost all ideas related to how
information becomes stored in memory agree that the learner more deeply and
meaningfully processes information that is presented in a context-rich manner.
One of the most important agreements is that elaboration is a key to permanently
storing information in a way that facilitates its quick retrieval when it is needed.
Most theories hold that the mind contains some type of framework into which
new information is placed. This structure is multi-leveled and has varying degrees
of specificity. New information can be matched with, compared to, contrasted
to, joined with, or modified to fit with existing structures. The formation of and
continual building of these structures, then, is critical in order to process
information. This in-place structural system allows for differing levels of
complexity of information processing.
4.9 UNIT END QUESTIONS
1) Describe the Attkinson-Shiffrin model of information processing in detail.
2) Compare information processing and level of processing models of memory.
3) How does a connectionist (PDP) model handle memory?
4) What is meant by level of recall, level of processing, and self-refrence effect?
5) What are the basic principles and models of information processing?
6) How does organisation in long-term memory take place?
7) Design an experiment to compare the maintenance (shallow) and elaborate
level of information processing
4.10 SUGGESTED READINGS AND REFERENCES
Abbot, B. (2002). Human Memory . Fort Wayne: Indiana University-Purdue
University at Fort Wayne, Psychology Department., from http://users.ipfw.edu/
abbot/120/LongTermMemory.html

===== PAGE 51 =====
55
Models of Infromation
Processing
Atkinson, R., & Shiffrin, R. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its
control processes. In K Spence & J Spence (Eds.). The Psychology of Learning
and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory (V ol. 2). New York: Academic
Press.
References
Bransford, J. (1979). Human Cognition: Learning, Understanding, and
Remembering. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Galotti, K.M. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Perception, Attention, and Memory.
London: Cengage.
Goldstein, E. H. (2008). Cognitive Psychology: Connecting Mind, Research and
Everyday Experience. London: Thomson Learning.
http://chiron.valdosta.edu/whuitt/col/cogsys/infoproc.html
http://www.well.com/user/smalin/miller.html]
Huitt, W. (2000). The Information Processing Approach. Educational Psychology
Interactive. V aldosta, GA: Valdosta State University.
Solso, R.L. (2006). Cognitive Psychology. New Delhi: Pearson Education.
Sternberg, R.J. (2009). Applied Cognitive Psychology: Perceiving, Learning,
and Remembering. London: Cengage.